--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Investment Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd


FEID Circular No. 03
Date: 30 September 2025

All Authorized Dealers in Foreign
Exchange in Bangladesh
Dear Sirs,
Relaxation of Reporting Requirement of Temporary Non-resident Taka Accounts (NRTAs) and
Temporary Foreign Currency (FC) Accounts for Foreign Investment
Please refer to paragraph 2(C), Chapter 9 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions-2018 (GFET) Volume-1, which outlines the reporting requirements of NRTA for a
proposed company to Foreign Exchange Investment Department (FEID), Bangladesh Bank (BB)
and FE Circular No. 10 date: 21 June 2023 regarding maintaining of temporary foreign currency
(FC) accounts for foreign investment.
2. To facilitate foreign investment, it has now been decided to relax the reporting requirement
of NRTAs and temporary FC accounts for foreign investment as follows:
A) Henceforth, it is no longer required to report the opening of NRTAs and temporary FC
accounts to FEID, BB. After incorporation of the company in Bangladesh, against which
such account has been opened, the Authorized Dealer (AD) shall notify FEID, BB in
accordance with paragraph 2(A), Chapter 9 of the GFET-2018, Volume-1 within 14
(fourteen) days with all relevant documents including encashment certificate with online
transaction ID, NRTA and/or temporary FC account statement, and statement of the
permanent account reflecting the corresponding debit and credit entries.

B) The AD may encash the fund into BDT or retain it in foreign currency for up to 1 (one)
year as per FE Circular No. 10, date: 21 June 2023. If foreign investment fund is encashed,
the investor may submit form-C in electronic form in accordance with FE Circular No. 01,
date: 01 February 2023 and subsequently the company authority/representative will
sign the printed copy of the electronic form-C within 14 (fourteen) days after the
incorporation of the company. Accordingly, AD shall notify FEID, BB along with the
documents mentioned in (A) above.

C) If, for any reason, the proposed investment/incorporation does not take place, the
balance of the account, after meeting the required expenses, may be repatriated without
prior approval from Bangladesh Bank. However, ADs shall report closure of such
accounts to FEID and FEOD, Head office/concerned office of Bangladesh Bank within 14
(fourteen) days along with an attested copy of form-C and TM form (as applicable), both
inward and outward foreign exchange transactions ID, and NRTA and/or temporary FC
account statement.
Please bring the instructions of this circular to the notice of all your concerned clientele.
This circular will come into force immediately.
Yours Faithfully,



(Abu Saleh Mohammed Shahab Uddin)
Director (FEID)
Phone: +88-02-9530144