--- Page 1 ---
বাংলাদেশ ব্যাক

(সেন্ট্রাল ব্যাংক অব বাংলাদেশ)
প্রধান কার্যালয় ডেট ম্যানেজমেন্ট ডিপার্টমেন্ট
মতিঝিল, ঢাকা-১০০০
বাংলাদেশ ।
ডিএমডি সার্কুলার নং: ০৩ তারিখ: _ ২৩ 8B ১৪৩০ বঙ্গাব্দ
০৬ জুন ২০২৩ Rory

ব্যবস্থাপনা পরিচালক/প্রধান নির্বাহী কর্মকর্তা
বাংলাদেশে কার্যরত সকল ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠান
(শরীয়াহ্ভিত্তিক ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠান ব্যতীত)।

“Guidelines on the Secondary Trading of Government Securities, 2023” প্রসঙ্গে |

সরকারি সিকিউরিটিজের সেকেন্ডারি মার্কেট সম্প্রসারণ এবং অধিকতর সক্রিয় করার লক্ষ্যে বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংকের Market
Infrastructure (MI) Module এর পাশাপাশি দেশের স্টক এক্সচেঞ্জ (ঢাকা এবং DUATT স্টক এক্সচেঞ্জ) এর ট্রেডিং
প্লাটফর্মের মাধ্যমে সরকারি সিকিউরিটিজের লেনদেন কার্যক্রম সুষ্ঠুভাবে সম্পাদনের ব্যবস্থা গ্রহণ করা হয়েছে।

০২। উল্লিখিত প্লাটফর্মসমূহে সরকারি সিকিউরিটিজের ক্রয়-বিক্রয়ের বিধি, নীতি, পদ্ধতি, সিকিউরিটিজ ও ফাল্ড
সেটেলমেন্ট প্রক্রিয়া, লেনদেনের পক্ষসমূহের দায়িত্ব-কর্তব্য এবং লেনদেন সংশ্লিষ্ট যে কোনো বিবাদ (dispute) নিষ্পত্তি প্রক্রিয়ার
বিষয়ে সংশ্লিষ্ট অংশগ্রহণকারীদের/পক্ষসমূহের জন্য অনুসৃতব্য নির্দেশনাবলী সম্বলিত “Guidelines on the Secondary
Trading of Government Securities, 2023” প্রণয়ন করা হয়েছে যা পরিপালনের জন্য আপনাদেরকে নির্দেশনা প্রদান
করা হলো।

০৩ | এ নির্দেশনা অবিলষে কার্যকর হবে |

আপনাদের বিশ্বস্ত,

সংযোজনী: বর্ণনা মোতাবেক। ৫৯4

(খোন্দকার সিদ্দীকুর রহমান)
পরিচালক (ডিএমডি)
ফোনঃ ৯৫৩০১৩১
ই-মেইল: khondaker.rahman@ bb.org.bd

--- Page 2 ---
Guidelines on the Secondary
Trading of Government Securities


June 2023




















Debt Management Department
Bangladesh Bank
www.bb.org.bd

--- Page 3 ---
Page 2 of 13

List of Acronyms
Acronym
Elaboration
BB
Bangladesh Bank
BGTB
Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds
BOID
Beneficiary Owner Identification
BPID
Business Partner ID
BSEC
Bangladesh Securities and Exchange Commission
CDBL
Central Depository Bangladesh Limited
CSE
Chittagong Stock Exchange
DMD
Debt Management Department
DP
Depository Participant
DSE
Dhaka Stock Exchange
DvP
Delivery versus Payment
DfP
Delivery free of Payment
FD
Finance Division
FMI
Financial Market Infrastructure
FI
Financial Institution
GSOM
Government Securities Order-Matching Trading Platform
G-Sec
Government Securities
IB Repo
Interbank Repo
IPS
Investment Portfolio Securities
ISIN
International Securities Identification Numbers
LSF
Liquidity Support Facilities
MD
Member Dealer
MI Module
Market Infrastructure Module
OTC
Over-the-Counter
PD
Primary Dealer
SGL
Subsidiary General Ledger
T-Bill
Treasury Bill
T-Bond
Treasury Bond
TWS
Trader Work Station

--- Page 4 ---
Page 3 of 13

Table of Contents
Chapter No.
Title
Page No.
Chapter 1
Introduction
4-6

1. Short Title

2. Definitions

3. Eligible Securities

4. Eligible Trading Platforms

a) Bangladesh Bank‟s Electronic Trading Platforms

b) DSE and CSE Trading Platforms

5. Government Securities Depository
Chapter 2
G-Sec Trading through Bangladesh Bank’s Electronic System
6-10

6. Secondary Trading of G-Sec through BB‟s Electronic System

7. Trading Rules for Over-the-Counter (OTC)

8. Trading Rules for GSOM

a) Trading Day

b) Trading Period

c) Types of Transactions

d) Matching of Orders

e) Queue Priority

f) Order Modification

g) Order Withdrawal

h) Trade Confirmation

i) Market Control Parameters

9. Settlement Process of the Fund and Securities Traded in
Bangladesh Bank‟s Electronic System

a) Settlement of G-Sec with fund involvement in the System

b) Settlement of G-Sec without any fund involvement with
Bangladesh Bank through DfP

c) Settlement Cycle

d) Assurance of Payment in Case of a Change in Security
Ownership

e) Other Instructions

10. Default Management by Bangladesh Bank
Chapter 3
G-Sec Trading through DSE and CSE
10-12

11. Government Securities trading through the DSE and the CSE
10

a) Trading process
10

b) Clearing and Settlement Process
11

c) Other Instructions
11

d) Default Management by DSE and CSE
12

e) Dispute Management by Bangladesh Bank & BSEC
12
Chapter 4
Fees and Others
12-13

12. Separate Window for Cliental Services
12

13. Coupon Payment/Proceed Settlement Procedure
12

14. Miscellaneous
13

a) Fees and charges for secondary trading
13

b) Reporting
13

c) Responsibilities and Issuance of Relevant Instructions
13

--- Page 5 ---
Page 4 of 13

Debt Management Department
Bangladesh Bank
Guidelines on the Secondary Trading of Government Securities, 2023
Dated 06 June, 2023

In exercising the powers conferred by paragraph 5(vi) of the “Issuance and Re-issuance of
Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds” notification issued on 24 June, 2007 (amended on 08
January, 2023), Bangladesh Bank hereby issues the “Guidelines on the Secondary Trading of
Government Securities, 2023” for the smooth functioning of the secondary trading of
Government Securities on its own Electronic System (MI/FMI) as well as on stock exchange
(DSE and CSE) platforms.

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
1. Short Title: These guidelines shall be called the “Guidelines on the Secondary Trading of
Government Securities, 2023”.
2. Definitions
a) In these guidelines, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context:
i. “Issuer” means the Government of Bangladesh;
ii. “Government Securities (hereinafter mentioned as „G-Sec‟)” shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it by section 2(20) of the Sorkari Rin Ain, 2022 (Act No. 17 of
2022);
iii. “Bangladesh Government Treasury Bond (BGTB)/Treasury Bonds” shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it by section 2(2) of the Sorkari Rin Ain, 2022;
iv. “Treasury Bill (T-bill)” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it by section 2(3) of
the Sorkari Rin Ain, 2022;
v. "Primary Dealer (PD)” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it by paragraph 1 (e)
of the “Issuance and Re-issuance of Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds”
notification issued on 24 June, 2007;
vi. “Member Dealer (MD)” means a bank, financial institution or any other institutions
maintaining a current account with BB, who has access to the Electronic System for
proprietary dealing or for dealing on behalf of their clients;
vii. “Proprietary Dealing” means Government Securities dealing by the MDs with the
Electronic System in relation to their own portfolios;
viii. “Client” means investors (other than MDs), who can participate in the investment and
trading of Government Securities through the concerned MD;
ix. "Electronic System" means a system or any other platform introduced or maintained by
Bangladesh Bank for recording and management of Government Securities or any other

--- Page 6 ---
Page 5 of 13

securities, which will act as a secondary trading platform as well as a Government
Securities Depository;
x. “Government Securities Depository” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it by
section 2(21) of the Sorkari Rin Ain, 2022;
xi. “SGL” means “Subsidiary General Ledger”, which is a unique account where the MDs‟
Government Securities are preserved;
xii. “IPS” means “Investment Portfolio Securities”, which is a unique account where the
Clients‟ Government Securities are preserved;
xiii. “Business Partner Identification (BPID)” means a unique code assigned to each
SGL/IPS account, maintained with Bangladesh Bank for the investment of Government
Securities;
xiv. “BOID” means Beneficiary Owner Identification, which is maintained with the
depository registered under the Depository Act, 1999 (Act No. 6 of 1999);
xv. “OTC trade” means „Over-the-Counter trades‟ that occur between the investors by
direct negotiation;
xvi. “Government Securities Order Matching (GSOM)” means an electronic anonymous
order-matching trading platform of government securities operated by Bangladesh Bank;
xvii. “Hours of Operation” means the trading hours available in a particular business day to
the users for trading in the Electronic System;
xviii. “Order” means purchase or sale order placed through the Electronic System or on the
exchange platforms;
xix. “TREC” means Trading Right Entitlement Certificate as defined in the Exchanges
Demutualization Act, 2013 (15th act of 2013);
xx. “TREC Holder” means a person who holds a TREC issued by the exchanges;
xxi. “Delivery versus Payment (DvP)” means a settlement model which implies that the
movement of securities occurs only after the successful transfer of funds from the buyer
to the seller; and
xxii. “Delivery free of Payment (DfP)” means a settlement mechanism/method in which the
transfer of securities occurs free of payment;
b) Words and expressions, which are not defined in section 2.a), shall have the same
meaning as mentioned in the Sorkari Rin Ain, 2022, Public Debt Rules, 1946, “Issuance
and Re-issuance of Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds” notification issued on 24
June, 2007 (amended on 08 January, 2023) and any other rules and regulations issued
thereunder.
3. Eligible Securities: Bangladesh Bank shall determine the securities that are eligible to be
listed for trading in the market from time to time. Eligible Securities shall be of following
types:

--- Page 7 ---
Page 6 of 13

a) Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds;
b) Treasury Bills; and
c) Any other Government Securities.
4. Eligible Trading Platforms: G-Sec shall be traded simultaneously in the following trading
platforms:
a) Bangladesh Bank‟s Electronic Trading Platforms; and
b) DSE and CSE Trading Platforms.
5. Government Securities Depository: Bangladesh Bank shall maintain records of all
SGL/IPS accounts through the Electronic System, which will act as a depository of
Government Securities. Bangladesh Bank‟s Electronic System shall be used as a depository
and trading platform of Government Securities. It will maintain the details of security
balances in various beneficial owner accounts. These balances arise due to the issuance of
Government Securities in the primary market and trading of the same in the secondary
market. The ownership type of these Government Securities should either be Proprietary or
Client.

CHAPTER 2: G-SEC TRADING THROUGH
BANGLADESH BANK’S ELECTRONIC SYSTEM

6. Secondary Trading of Government Securities through Bangladesh Bank’s Electronic
system: Government Securities issued through the auctions, or privately placed can be traded
through the following ways:
a) Over-the-Counter (OTC); and
b) Government Securities Order Matching (GSOM).
7. Trading Rules for Over-the-Counter (OTC): In OTC, the trade shall be executed by
negotiation between MDs (for its own trade and on behalf of its clients) outside the trading
platform. OTC trade shall be reported in the Electronic System of Bangladesh Bank for
settlement of securities and fund. Either the buyer or the seller Member shall input the
transaction details and is referred to as the instructing party. The other Member shall
confirm/accept the trade and is referred to as a confirming party. On confirmation, the trade
shall be taken up for settlement (fund and securities).
8. Trading Rules for GSOM: GSOM of Bangladesh Bank shall provide users access to trade
in the secondary market in real-time.
a) Trading Day: The trading shall be open on all business days as declared by Bangladesh
Bank.
b) Trading Period: The trading period shall be determined by Bangladesh Bank on time to
time. Provided that, in consideration of any particular circumstance or situation,
Bangladesh Bank may extend, curtail, or change the trading period. During the trading
period, members shall be allowed to submit, delete and modify orders. Orders will be
executed during the trading period; and after the end of the trading period, the Electronic

--- Page 8 ---
Page 7 of 13

System will stop receiving orders.
c) Types of Transactions: Orders in GSOM can be categorized on the basis of Price,
Time/Validity and Quantity/Volume.
i. Price-Based Orders: Based on the price, investors can order under the following
categories,
A. Limit Order (LMT): Limit order must have a price limit which ensures that the
order shall be traded at a price equal to or better than the limit price.
B. Market Order (MKT): An order to buy or sell securities immediately at the best
available current price.
C. Stop-Loss Limit Order (SLL): An order to buy a security at no more (or sell at no
less) than a specified limit price.
D. Stop-Loss Market Order (SLM): An order to buy (or sell) a security once the price
of the security climbs above (or drops below) a specified stop price.
ii. Time/Validity-Based Orders: Based on time/validity, investors can order under the
following categories,
A. Good-Till-Session-End-Time (Day): The deal will be lived till session end time
(Day).
B. Good-Till-Cancellation (GTC): The deal will be lived till Cancellation or Matched.
C. Immediate or Cancel (IOC): The deal will be matched immediately or canceled.
D. Good-Till-Date (GTDt): The trader can specify the date till which the order should
remain active in the market.
E. Good-Till-Day (GTD): The trader can specify the day (number of days) till which
the order should remain active in the market.
iii. Quantity/Volume-Based Orders: Based on quantity/volume, investors can order under
the following categories,
A. Minimum Fill (MF): This signifies the minimum amount order quantity shall be
executed as soon as the order is submitted to the trading engine. If the order is not
fully executed, the remaining order quantity shall be stored, which shall be visible to
the market for trading.
B. Disclosed Amount (DA): An order may specify the total or lesser volume of
securities for disclosure to the market. The disclosed volume shall not exceed the
total volume. The total and disclosed volume of an order must be of a market lot. An
increase in disclosed volume shall change in the queue priority, but a decrease in
disclosed volume shall not change in queue priority.
C. All or None (AON): This signifies that either all of the orders quantity shall be
executed as soon as the order is submitted to the trading engine or the entire order
shall be rejected and returned to the trader.

--- Page 9 ---
Page 8 of 13

d) Matching of Orders
i. All orders with price equal to or better than the opening price will match automatically.
ii. Orders which are at the most favorable price, that is, at the lowest selling or highest
buying price, shall be executed first. If two or more orders are listed in the order book at
the same price, the oldest order shall be executed first.
e) Queue Priority
i. Orders that cannot immediately be executed shall be queued for future execution in a
specific order of priority, mainly based on price and time of entry.
ii. In case an order is executed partly, the remaining part of such order shall not lose its
priority.
iii. The queue priority shall be determined by the Electronic System through an interactive
process and the order of priority displayed by the Electronic System.
f) Order Modification: Orders submitted to the Electronic System can be modified at any
time before execution. Only the price, quantity, and validity date of order active in the
Electronic System can be modified. Modification of price and quantity results in re-
queuing the order. If only the validity date is modified, then the order‟s position in the
queue shall not be changed.
g) Order Withdrawal: The trader can withdraw or cancel his orders anytime before
matching.
h) Trade Confirmation: For every successful match, a trade with a unique reference
number shall be created, and the counterparties to the trade shall be notified by means of
trade confirmation. The security, the trade quantity, and price at which the trade occurred
shall be broadcasted to all trading workstations, which can be seen on the market ticker.
The trade confirmation shall be seen on the trading ticker on the trading workstations of
both counterparties to the trade.
i) Market Control Parameters: Bangladesh Bank shall regulate the market-control
parameters, including the type of orders allowed, trading period, matching basis, and
other parameters in the market from time to time.
9. Settlement Process of the Fund and Securities Traded in Bangladesh Bank’s Electronic
System
a) Settlement of G-Sec with fund involvement in the System
i. Securities Transfer between Two MDs or MD to Other MDs’ Client or Clients of
Different MDs: Transactions (both in OTC and GSOM) shall be done following the
Delivery versus Payment (DvP) process for settlement. DvP settlement model implies
that the movement of securities occurs only after the successful transfer of funds from
the buyer to the seller. Fund settlement shall occur between MDs who maintain current
accounts with Bangladesh Bank. Security settlement shall occur between beneficial
owners of securities.

--- Page 10 ---
Page 9 of 13

b) Settlement of G-Sec without any fund involvement with Bangladesh Bank through
DfP
i. Securities Transfer from Own Client to the MD or Two Clients of an MD:
Securities shall be transferred between Clients to MD or two clients‟ security accounts
operated by an MD through account transfers. Such transfers will not have a fund
consideration on the current account maintained at Bangladesh Bank for the MD as the
clients belong to the same Member. Fund settlement between clients of the MD will be
handled and ensured by the MD within their own procedure.
ii. Securities Transfer between Two Clients due to dissolution or decease of client
etc.: Securities transfer to the partners/directors due to dissolution of a company or
transfer to the successor due to death of a securities holder, the MD can transfer
securities upon getting an application from the successor as per Sorkari Rin Ain, 2022.
Such transfer shall not be considered as secondary trade.
iii. Securities Transfer due to Change in MD: Client can change their securities account
from one MD to another MD. In this case, BPID holder has to open a new BPID with
another MD and then apply to former MD to take necessary actions for transferring
securities to the newly opened BPID. After getting application, MD shall follow the
Delivery Free of Payment (DfP) model for securities transfer. Such transfer shall not be
considered as secondary trade.
c) Settlement Cycle: Settlement date shall be a valid business date. Settlement cycle shall
be T+0 for any transaction among the investors in OTC and GSOM.
d) Assurance of Payment in Case of a Change in Security Ownership: The depository
shall ensure that security ownership will be transferred only after receipt of confirmation
of payment in the case of DvP.
e) Other Instructions
i. MD shall not transfer Government Securities without the written instruction of their
clients.
ii. Transfer of Government Securities shall follow the Delivery versus Payment (DvP) or
Delivery free of Payment (DfP) process of settlement.
iii. When the instructions of transferor and transferee for security transfer and transmission
match, then the Government Securities shall be automatically transferred without
delay from one account to another.
10. Default Management by Bangladesh Bank: In case of a failure of the settlement (deliver
securities and/or make payment within the settlement day) by an MD, it shall be settled as
per the process described below:
a) If a Member Dealer fails to deliver securities and/or make payment within the settlement
day, the Defaulting Party shall try to settle the unsettled transaction by buying-in from
the market or managing fund from the market within the transaction period.
b) If bought-in securities or managing fund is not possible within the transaction period, the

--- Page 11 ---
Page 10 of 13

penalty will be imposed on the defaulting parties. The defaulting party shall not be
allowed to participate in secondary trading and interbank repo activities for the next 07
working days as a penalty.
c) In addition, the defaulting party shall have to pay the other parties a penalty at a rate
twice the weighted average overnight interbank repo rate+2% on the total trade amount
for one day.
d) If any MD fails to pay interest, and/or penalty described in paragraph 9(c), Bangladesh
Bank shall have the right to adjust the amount from the current account maintained with
Bangladesh Bank of the defaulting participants.
e) Bangladesh Bank may suspend or cancel dealership for breaching any provision of this
guideline or any directive issued thereunder or may take further disciplinary measures
against any MD if found guilty in an investigation by the Bangladesh Bank.

CHAPTER 3: G-SEC TRADING THROUGH DSE AND CSE
11. Government Securities trading through the Dhaka Stock Exchange (DSE) and the
Chittagong Stock Exchange (CSE): Government securities can be traded in the trading
platforms of DSE and CSE.
a) Trading process: Trading process of Government Securities is as below:
i. The existing holders of BPID in the MI module shall require opening a BO account
with TREC holders/DPs of the exchanges, if not have any, at least previous day of
trading if they intend to trade on the DSE or CSE trading platform. In this case, the
linked bank account of BPID shall be used as the linked bank account of BOID
(applicable only for the clients).
ii. The BPID holders who intend to trade on the DSE or CSE platform, will require to fill
in the relevant transfer forms (Annexure-1) and submit it to the MD along with BOID
acknowledgement copy to block/earmark partial or entire portion of their holding of G-
Sec in the MI module through the Financial Market Infrastructure (FMI) system.
iii. The corresponding MD will send the relevant transfer information on the same day
during banking hour to Bangladesh Bank for blocking the securities.
iv. Bangladesh Bank will block the intended holdings in the MI module according to the
BPID holder‟s intimation and transfer the relevant information of that holding to
exchanges for trading.
v. The investors will be able to trade the G-Sec in the exchange platforms using BOID
from the next trading day.
vi. The settlement of the trades will be done as per the settlement cycle of the exchanges.
vii. Settlement of fund will take place as per existing process of exchange clearing.
viii. An investor, who is willing to purchase G-Sec through BOID, will require to own a
BPID either prior to the purchase or Bangladesh Bank will create BPID account on the

--- Page 12 ---
Page 11 of 13

basis of BOID information after execution of the trade for the investors who have no
BPID.
ix. The said BPID mentioned in paragraph viii above will be opened based on the Bank
account (to be linked as MD) that has been used for opening BOID account. After
opening the BPID account, the respective MD will get the information regarding the
newly opened BPID along with trade data of its clients in the system. Concerned MD
will ensure whether BPIDs of their clients have been opened.
x. All the purchases through BOID will be reflected on the investors‟ BPID in the MI
module at the end of the settlement cycle for ensuring the ownership of G-sec.
xi. Settlement of securities will take place in the MI module on settlement day as per the
settlement cycle of the exchange for the transfer of ownership from Seller BPID to
Buyer BPID.
xii. At the end of the settlement date, MD will get the settlement information of its clients in
the system. Concerned MD will reconcile buy/sell positions of its clients with the
before and after trade holding.
xiii. If a BOID account holder who holds G-Sec intends to trade in the MI module then the
BOID holder will fill in the relevant transfer form (Annexure-1) and submit to
TREC/Brokers/DPs. After receiving relevant information from TREC/Brokers/DPs,
CDBL will send the relevant transfer information to Bangladesh Bank.
xiv. Bangladesh Bank will subsequently unblock the previously blocked holding, which will
then become again eligible for trading on the MI module instead of DSE or CSE trading
platform.
xv. The Clients/BPID holders can check their Government Securities portfolio balance in
the Bangladesh Bank‟s Electronic System through the MDs/TREC/Brokers/DPs.
b) Clearing and Settlement Process: Settlement of fund of G-Sec trading will take place
as per existing process of exchange clearing. Therefore, Bangladesh Bank will not be
responsible for the settlement of fund related to the trading in DSE and CSE platforms.
Settlement of exchange traded securities will take place through the CDBL which will be
updated finally in the MI module for the transfer of ownership from Seller BPID to
Buyer BPID.
c) Other Instructions: Any BPID holder may continue to trade in the Bangladesh Bank‟s
Electronic System (MI Module) as well as on the DSE and CSE platform by opening a
BOID with a TREC Holder.
i. All eligible investors, including MDs, are allowed to trade on DSE & CSE trading
platform according to the guideline.
ii. In case a BPID holder opts to trade G-Sec in DSE & CSE trading platform and already
has a BOID (with a linked bank account other than that of the BPID), the bank account
of BPID has to be used as the bank account of BOID.
iii. A conventional bank account has to be used instead of a Shariah based bank account

--- Page 13 ---
Page 12 of 13

with any BOID for the trading of G-Sec in exchange platform.
iv. Coupon payments and the redemption at maturities will be done by Bangladesh Bank.
v. Shut period on trading of G-Sec shall commence 02 working days before each due date
of coupon payment and maturity date for trading of G-Sec in exchange platform.
d) Default Management by DSE and CSE: In case of a failure of the settlement of G-Sec
and/or fund by any concerned party related to the stock exchanges, the default
management process shall be conducted as per the existing rules, guidelines, norms and
practice of BSEC. On the other hand, in case of any default related to the Bangladesh
Bank‟s electronic system, the default management process shall be conducted as per the
existing rules, guidelines, norms and practice of Bangladesh Bank.
e) Dispute Management by Bangladesh Bank & BSEC
i. A joint committee on dispute management shall be formed by Bangladesh Bank
comprising representatives from FD, Bangladesh Bank, BSEC, DSE, CSE, and CDBL
to solve the common disputes among the parties.
ii. The committee shall report their observation/recommendation to both Bangladesh Bank
and BSEC to do the needful at their end.
iii. The issues shall be resolved upon recommendation from the committee and that
decision made by the committee shall be final.

CHAPTER 4: FEES AND OTHERS
12. Separate Window for Cliental Services: Government Securities Investment Windows of
MDs shall provide Cliental Services as follows:
a) Opening of a Client‟s Government Securities account (BPID);
b) Participating in primary auction and taking initiatives to purchase and sell Government
Securities as per Client‟s requisition;
c) Processing the coupon payments and sale/redemption proceeds through concerned
clients‟ Bank accounts;
d) Maintaining correspondence and handling settlement activities related to trading of G-
Sec that took place in other trading platforms/exchanges;
e) Reconciliation of Client‟s securities account; and
f) Corresponding with own treasury divisions accordingly.
13. Coupon Payment/Proceed Settlement Procedure: As per the existing practice, the
purchased amount, the coupon payments and the sale/redemption amount (at maturity) will
be settled through the holders‟ corresponding banks‟ current accounts maintained with
Bangladesh Bank and MDs will settle the funds with the clients‟ bank accounts accordingly.

--- Page 14 ---
Page 13 of 13

14. Miscellaneous
a) Fees and charges for secondary trading
Transactions through Bangladesh Bank’s Electronic System: MDs shall collect
transaction fee of BDT 100 [as per the “Issuance and Re-issuance of Bangladesh
Government Treasury Bonds” notification issued on 24 June, 2007 (amended on 08
January, 2023)] per transaction for the transactions occurring through Bangladesh
Bank‟s Electronic System (including the transactions occurring between the Clients
of MDs). The fees collected by MDs shall be distributed on the basis of calendar year
as per the following schedule:
Beneficiary
Percentage of Fees
MD
85%
Electronic System (Bangladesh Bank)
15%
ii.
Transactions through DSE/CSE Platform: Bangladesh Bank shall collect its share
of transaction fees from the Exchanges for the transactions occurring through the
DSE/CSE platform and distribute on the basis of calendar year as per the following
schedule:
Beneficiary
Percentage of Fees
MD
85%
Electronic System (Bangladesh Bank)
15%

b) Reporting: The MDs shall report their secondary market trades according to the
following methods:
Daily trade positions (Proprietary and Clients‟ trading) are to be reported through
email to Securities Section, Motijheel Office, Bangladesh Bank, within banking hour
on a daily basis in the process/form specified in the attached schedule (Annexure-2)
mentioning both GSOM and OTC trade.
ii.
Secondary market trading information, including the trades between their own
clients, has to be reported by the MDs to DMD, Bangladesh Bank on a monthly basis
in the process/form specified in the attached schedule (Annexure-3).
c) Responsibilities and Issuance of Relevant Instructions
MDs shall be responsible for all orders entered from their trading workstation in the
Bangladesh Bank‟s Electronic System.
ii.
Bangladesh Bank may issue circulars, circular letters, or any such instruction from
time to time, for clarifications, modifications of these guidelines, or removal of any
complication in the execution or operation.
iii.
Any determination made by the System through an interactive process shall be
conclusive.

-----------------------------------End-----------------------------------

--- Page 15 ---
ISIN

Name of Securities
Name of MD/DP
MD (BPID)/DP ID

Name of Account Holder
BP/BO ID
G- Sec Amount (BDT)
to be transferred
*G-Sec Quantity to be transferred
*G-Sec Quantity = G-Sec Amount / Face value
Name of MD/DP
MD (BPID) / DP ID
BP/BO ID

Government Securities Transfer Request Form
Please fill in all the details in
CAPITAL letters
Application No.
Date
Annexure-2



Transfer Mode:
BPID to BOID
BOID to BPID
D D M
M Y Y Y Y















































Transferor Details












































































































Transferee Details








































































































Name of Account Holder (s)
Signature (s)





For MD/DP Office Use Only:




Name
Designation
Signature
MD/DP seal




























Annexure-1

--- Page 16 ---
Annexure-2

The Director
Date :
Bangladesh Bank
Motijheel Office,Dhaka
Dear Sir,
On behalf of our own/customer we confirm the Buy/Sell of Government Securities particulars of which are as furnished below :
BP ID
Bank Name :
Buy Details Of Government Securities:
Counter
Party Name*
Face value
Purchase Price
per TK.100
Amount in words:
Sell Details of Government Securities:
Counter
Party Name*
Face value
Purchase Price
per TK.100
Amount in words:
Comments:
* Mention Counter party name in case of OTC transaction
Authorized Signature
Authorized Signature
ISIN
BPID
(in case of
Client's trade)
SL No.
BPID
(in case of
Client's trade)
Total
Total Settlement Value
Daily G-Sec Trading (Buy/Sale) Report
SL No.
ISIN
Total Settlement Value
Settlement
Date
Transaction
Platform
(OTC/GSOM)
Total
Transaction
Platform
(OTC/GSOM)
Settlement
Date

--- Page 17 ---
Annexure-3
Tk. In Crore
Proprietary
Clients
Total
Proprietary
Clients
Total
Proprietary
Clients
Total
Proprietary Clients
Total
3=(1+2)
6=(4+5)
7=(3+6)
10=(8+9)
11
12
13=(11+12) 14=(10+13)
15
16
17=(15+16)
* OTC trade including the transactions occurring among the clients and between MD and Clients within the depository.
Sell
Monthly Secondary Trading Information of Government Securities
Name of the MD:
Month & Year:
OTC*
Grand total
GSOM
OTC*
Total
Buy
GSOM
MD's BPID
Grand total
Sell
DSE and CSE
Buy