--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 03 Date: February 07, 2022

Head offices/Principle offices of
All Authorized Dealers of
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Submission of Daily Exchange Position Statement

Please refer to Paragraph-22, Chapter-2 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions (GFET)-2018, Volume-2 whereby the Authorized Dealers (ADs) are instructed
to submit the Daily Exchange Position statements through Rationalized Input Template
(RIT).

02. For further convenience of supervision, it has been decided that the Paragraph-22
and Appendix-49A & 49B will be replaced by the updated “Paragraph-22 and Appendix-49”

containing new RIT of Daily Exchange Position Statement attached herewith.

03. Authorized Dealers (ADs) shall start submitting [trial] Daily Exchange Position
using the new RIT from 16 February 2022 in excel format by email. At the end of this trial
period, from 21 March, 2022 ADs shall start uploading their Daily Exchange Position to
ereturns.bb.org.bd. Beside the new RIT, ADs shall continue submitting Daily Exchange

Position to EDW using previous RIT until further instruction.

Please bring the contents of this circular to notice of all stakeholders concerned.

Yours Faithfully,

মি nh,
(Kazi Rafiqul Hasan)

General Manager
Phone: 9530123

--- Page 2 ---
22. Submission of Daily Exchange Position Statement
(A) ADs shall maintain records of their exchange position in foreign currencies as at the close of
business on each working day in the prescribed proforma (Appendix 49). The currency wise
daily exchange position statement shall be submitted to Bangladesh Bank on the following
working day through RIT.
Banks shall maintain their overall exposures in foreign currencies (overall net exchange
position) within the ‘Open position limit’ at the end of the day. The open position limit is
required to be approved by the Bangladesh Bank on the basis of total capital (sum of Tier-
1 & Tier-2) and some other qualitative judgment.
The proforma of exchange position has been drawn up to suit the different types of
bookkeeping used in different banks. The main items which may cause some difficulties
are explained below. In the event of any further difficulty being encountered, the AD
should refer the matter to the Foreign Exchange Policy Department of Bangladesh Bank.
(B) Guidelines for Calculation and Reporting of Foreign Exchange Exposure of Bank

Foreign currency exposure of a bank is defined as the sum of all foreign currency
denominated assets and liabilities. The exposure shall be the consolidated value of the
bank’s DBU and OBU operation. The exposure shall also include the net forward and
other possible off-balance sheet items (as decided by Bangladesh Bank) in each currency.
No foreign currency denominated asset or liability can be ignored, unless it has been
explicitly agreed with the Bangladesh Bank.
Bank’s overall foreign exchange exposure (i.e. overall net exchange position) is to be
measured in two successive steps: first, the measurement of the exposure in each single
currency, and second, the measurement of overall foreign exchange exposure (i.e. overall
net exchange position) by aggregating the sum of the net short positions or sum of the
net long positions whichever is higher.
(C) Calculation of Net Exchange Position in Each Currency
Bank’s net exchange position in each currency shall be calculated by summing (i) net
position in balance sheet items and (ii) net position in off-balance sheet items.
Balance sheet items include spot position only. The net spot position is the difference
between foreign currency assets and the liabilities in the balance sheet. This should
include all accrued income/expenses.
Off-balance sheet items include all foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities not
included in the balance sheet. These transactions are recorded in the off-balance sheet
section of the book of a bank.
Off-balance sheet items include forward position denominated in foreign currency. Net
Forward Position in a currency represents all amounts to be received less all amounts to
be paid at a future value date under forward foreign exchange transactions including the
far leg position of currency swap contracts.
Therefore, banks shall arrive at net foreign exchange position in each currency by adding

(i) net spot position and

(ii) net forward position.

--- Page 3 ---
(D) Banks shall, thus, calculate the overall net exchange position in the following manner
(i) Calculate the net exchange position in each currency;
(ii) Convert the net positions in various currencies in equivalent USD [using the
conversion rate determined by ‘Forex Reserve and Treasury management
Department (FRTMD) of Bangladesh Bank’ or ‘Bangladesh Foreign Exchange Dealers
Association (BAFEDA)’];
(iii) Arrive at the sum of all the net long positions;
(iv) Arrive at the sum of all the net short positions;
(v) Arrive at the overall net foreign exchange position [higher of (iii) or (iv) above]
The overall net foreign exchange position thus arrived must be kept within the limit
approved by Bangladesh Bank.
Net Exchange Position shall be worked out on the basis of opening balance and other
transactions of the day concerned as per the local books of the Authorized Dealer. All assets
take the form of debit balances and all liabilities take the form of credit balances.
Therefore, if an Authorized Dealer holds a balance with its correspondent/OBU book, its
local book will show a debit balance, as the AD is holding an asset. Similarly, an overdrawn
position with an overseas correspondent/OBU book will be shown as a credit balance in the
local book. No under valuation shall take place; assets are to be marked to market in
adherence to the ‘Guidelines on Foreign Exchange Risk Management’. Balance sheet and
off-balance sheet exposures are to be reported separately but added together to arrive at
overall exposures in individual currency. The nostro balances as per local book and nostro
balances as per book of the overseas correspondents/OBU should be completely
reconciled. The banks shall take utmost measures for complete reconciliation as suggested
in the ‘Guidelines on Foreign Exchange Risk Management’.
(E) Submission of Daily Exchange Position Statement
Banks are required to submit daily statement as mentioned below:

i. The exchange position at the beginning opening (Section A of Appendix 49);

ii. The transactions during the reporting day (Section B of Appendix 49);
iii. The exchange position at the end of the day (Section C of Appendix 49). (i.e., the
opening position for the next day)

Transfer between different foreign currency accounts does not affect day transactions. For
instance, the transfer of the balance in an NFCD account after maturity to an approved
foreign currency account does not constitute buy or sell on the part of the bank on the day
transaction.

--- Page 4 ---
(F) Description of some items of the Daily Exchange Position Statement

Clarification of the contents of the columns:
Items in the
column
Clarification
1 & 1*
Balance sheet items in USD only
2 & 2*
Balance sheet items in EURO only
3 & 3*
Balance sheet items in JPY only
4 & 4*
Balance sheet items in GBP only
5 & 5*
Summation of balance sheet items in all other currencies
converted in equivalent USD
Off-balance sheet items in USD only
Off-balance sheet items in EURO only
Off-balance sheet items in JPY only
Off-balance sheet items in GBP only
10
Summation of off-balance sheet items in all other currencies
converted in equivalent USD
11
Total of long positions (among different currencies as indicated
at Row 1.6 of section A & C and Row 8 of section B of Appendix
49) in equivalent US Dollar
12
Total of short positions (among different currencies as indicated
in Row 1.6 of section A & C and Row 8 of section B of Appendix
49) in equivalent US Dollar
13
Overall net foreign exchange position i.e. higher of 11 or 12
above:
with +(plus) sign in case of long position and with -(minus) sign
in case of short position as the case may be.
*Assets and Liabilities of Offshore Banking Unit

(G) Clarification of items of the rows of Appendix-49

[A] At the beginning of the day:


Foreign currency Assets and liabilities of DBU and OBU operation at the beginning of
the day shall be reported under respective sub-head under this head.

1. Foreign currency position
1.1. Foreign currency assets [Sum of 1.1.1. to 1.1.7.]
1.1.1. Debit balances in Nostro account as per local book
Debit balances in Nostro account as per local book shall be reported here.

--- Page 5 ---
1.1.2.
Investments
1.1.2.1. BB clearing account
Funds held with Bangladesh Bank in FC clearing account.
1.1.2.2. Interbank Placement (Inside Bangladesh)
Placements, deposits etc. to other banks in Bangladesh (interbank
deposit in foreign currency) shall be reported under this head.
1.1.2.3. Fund mobilized to Own OBU operation (i.e.
Equity,Loan,Placement,Deposit,Balance)
Any form of fund mobilization (Equity, Loan, Placement, Deposit,
Balance etc.) to own OBUs in Bangladesh shall be reported under this
head.
1.1.2.4. Fund mobilized to OBUs of other banks (i.e. Equity, Loan,
Placement, Deposit, Balance)
Any form of fund mobilization (Equity, Loan, Placement, Deposit,
Balance etc.) to OBUs of any other banks of Bangladesh shall be
reported under this head.
1.1.2.5. Equity, Loan, Placement, Deposit, Balance to own overseas
branches
Any form of fund mobilization (Equity, Loan, Placement, Deposit,
Balance etc.) to own overseas branches abroad shall be reported under
this head.
1.1.2.6. Equity, Loan, Placement, Deposit, Balance to own overseas
subsidiary, exchange company
Any form of fund mobilization (Equity, Loan, Placement, Deposit,
Balance etc.) to own overseas subsidiary, exchange company abroad
shall be reported under this head.
1.1.2.7. Funds Retained by own overseas subsidiary, exchange
company
Any form of fund retained (i.e. remittance/profit/funds retained abroad
for capital shortfall or regulatory requirement) by own overseas
subsidiary, exchange company abroad shall be reported under this
head.

--- Page 6 ---
1.1.2.8. Equity, Loan, Placement to entity/bank/institution (domestic
or abroad) other than own subsidiary/branch/exchange company
Equity, Loan, Placement, Deposit, Balance etc. to entity/bank/institution
(domestic or abroad) other than own subsidiary/branch/exchange
company shall be reported under this head.
1.1.2.9. Other Investments
Other Investments (not mentioned in 1.1.2.1. to 1.1.2.8.) shall be
reported under this head.
1.1.3. Cash holding
Foreign currencies held in cash shall be reported under this head.
1.1.4. Bills Purchased and Discounted
1.1.4.1. Inland Bills Purchased (IBP)
1.1.4.2. Foreign Bills Purchased (FBP)
Banks are facilitating exporters by purchasing export bills (i.e. accepted
deferred/ usance bills or early payment against open account as stated
in FE Circular No. 25/2020) which are denominated as well as receivable
in foreign currency against direct/deemed exports. Banks are facilitating
importers by financing them while paying import bills (i.e. Usance
Payable at Sight LC). For the said facilities, Banks may have different
methods of entries for inland and foreign bills purchased (1.1.4.1 and
1.1.4.2 respectively). Nonetheless, the value of any type of bill
purchased shall be reported under the above heads respectively until or
unless the bill is realized or settled. When the exchange position is
prepared before realization of the bill(s), the total outstanding amount
of purchased bills (foreign and inland denominated as well as receivable
in foreign currency) should be reported under this head. Note that, any
outstanding payment liability in foreign currency (if any) against such
purchased bills shall not be deducted/adjusted while reporting under
the said head and shall be reported under newly created
row no. 1.2.3. Bills Payable (under the 1.2. Foreign currency liabilities
section). After realization of bills, such transactions are to be reported
in the local book and the respective heads will be adjusted accordingly.
1.1.5. Unsettled Spot Transactions
Amount of unsettled spot purchase transactions (spot purchase
transactions not yet settled/not yet booked for) against firm
deal/contract shall be reported under this head. The particulars of such
balances, if reported, should be mentioned in the footnote. After
settlement, such transactions are to be booked for in the local book and
the respective heads will be adjusted accordingly.

--- Page 7 ---
1.1.6. Loans and Advances to Non-bank Customers (Principal & Interest)
Any form of Loans and Advances to Non-bank Customers (individual or
institutional) in foreign currency shall be reported under this broad
head. There are 03(three) different subheads-
1.1.6.1. Principal Receivable from Individual Customers:
Principal outstanding of loans extended to non-bank individual
persons/customers (irrespective of maturity and type) shall be reported
under this head. This may include foreign currency outstanding (FC) of
credit card, any other Loans & Advances in FC etc.

1.1.6.2. Principal Receivable from Institutional Customers
Principal outstanding of loans extended to non-bank institutional
customers (irrespective of maturity and type) shall be reported under
this head.
1.1.6.3. Interest Receivable
Interest accrued on any kind of foreign currency assets but not yet
realized, shall be reported under this head. This may include, among
others, interest receivable on EDF and LTFF loans, discounted bills,
derivatives, Interest Rate Swap (IRS) agreements, etc.
1.1.7. Other FC Assets
Other Assets in foreign currency (FC) (not mentioned in 1.1.1. to 1.1.6.)
shall be reported under this head.
1.1.8. Assets of Own OBU operation
Assets of the bank’s own OBU shall be reported under this head. This is
additional to the consolidated reporting of Assets (1.1.1 to 1.1.7.) for
supervising OBU operation separately.
1.1.8.1 Cash Holding
Foreign currencies held in cash by OBUs shall be reported under this
head.
1.1.8.2. Fund mobilized to OBUs/branch/subsidiary/exchange
company of own bank
Any form of fund mobilization (Equity, Loan, Placement, Deposit,
Balance etc.) to own OBUs/branch/subsidiary/exchange company from
its own OBU operation shall be reported under this head.

--- Page 8 ---
1.1.8.3. Fund mobilized to OBUs/branch/subsidiary/exchange
company of other banks

Any form of fund mobilization (Equity, Loan, Placement, Deposit,
Balance etc.) to other bank’s OBUs/branch/subsidiary/exchange
company from its own OBU operation shall be reported under this
head.
1.1.8.4. Loans and Advances
Any form of Loans and Advances to Non-bank Customers (individual or
institutional) in foreign currency from OBU operation to inside or
outside Bangladesh shall be reported under the following respective
heads.
1.1.8.4.1 Inside Bangladesh

1.1.8.4.2 Outside Bangladesh
1.1.8.5. Bill purchased and discounted

1.1.8.5.1. Inland Bills Purchased (IBP)

1.1.8.5.2. Foreign Bills Purchased (FBP)

OBUs are facilitating exporters by purchasing export bills (i.e.
accepted deferred/ usance bills or early payment against open
account as stated in FE Circular No. 25/2020) which are
denominated as well as receivable in foreign currency against
direct/deemed exports. Banks are facilitating importers by
financing them while paying import bills (i.e. Usance Payable at
Sight LC). For the said facilities, OBUs may have different
methods of entries for inland and foreign bills purchased
(1.1.8.5.1. and 1.1.8.5.2. respectively). Nonetheless, the value of
any type of bill purchased shall be reported under the above
heads respectively until or unless the bill is realized or settled.
When the exchange position is prepared before realization of
the bill(s), the total outstanding amount of purchased bills
(foreign and inland denominated as well as receivable in foreign
currency) should be reported under this head. Note that, any
outstanding payment liability in foreign currency (if any) against
such purchased bills shall not be deducted/adjusted while
reporting under the said heads and shall be reported under
newly created row no. 1.2.8.2. Bills Payable (under the 1.2.8.
Liabilities of Own OBU operation). After realization of bills, such
transactions are to be reported in the local book and the
respective heads will be adjusted accordingly.

--- Page 9 ---
1.1.8.6 Other FC Assets
Other FC Assets of OBU operation (not mentioned in 1.1.8.1. to 1.1.8.5.)
shall be reported under this head.

1.2. Foreign currency liabilities[Sum of 1.2.1. to 1.2.7.]




1.2.1. Credit balances in Nostro accounts as per local book


Credit balances in Nostro accounts as per local book shall be reported here.
1.2.2. Balances of customers' accounts: Balance held in FC accounts of customers.

1.2.2.1. NFCD : Balance held in NFCD accounts of customers.


1.2.2.2. RFCD: Balance held in RFCD accounts of customers.


1.2.2.3. ERQ: Balance held in ERQ accounts of customers.

1.2.2.4. FC Accounts : Balance held in any other FC accounts of customers.

1.2.2.5. FDD, TT, MT etc. Payable
Banks issue FDDs, MTs and TTs on correspondents to pay foreign currency or
equivalent to the beneficiaries by debiting their own nostro accounts. If a
bank inputs the value of such instruments/transfers immediately into their
currency account, then such transactions need not to be reported under this
head. If the AD does not enter the amount of the instrument or transfer into
his currency position until it is actually paid, the amount needs to be
reported under this head. After settlement, such transactions are to be
reported in the local book and the respective head shall be adjusted
accordingly.

1.2.2.6. Other account balance
Balances of customer accounts other than FC, NFCD, RFCD, ERQ etc. (out of
exchange position) and not covered by any head as mentioned above shall
be reported under this head. The particulars of such balances, if reported,
shall be mentioned in footnote.

1.2.3. Bills Payable




1.2.3.1. Accepted Inland Bills Payable



1.2.3.2. Accepted Foreign Bills Payable
Against complied presentation of documents, Importer’s Bank primarily gives
acceptance to pay at the maturity and thus Bills payable (i.e. accepted
deferred/ usance bills) are generated. Nonetheless, the value of accepted
inland and foreign bills payable shall be reported under the above heads
(1.2.3.1. and 1.2.3.2.) respectively until or unless the bill is paid or settled.
When the exchange position is prepared before the payment of the bill(s),
the total outstanding amount of accepted bills (foreign and inland
denominated as well as payable in foreign currency) shall be reported under
this head. After payment of bills, such transactions are to be reported in the
local book and the respective heads will be adjusted accordingly.

--- Page 10 ---
1.2.4. Funds awaiting for Back to Back LC payment
Under the back-to-back system, import bills are usually paid from export
earnings. Bank receives export proceeds and retains these to settle import
bills accordingly on maturity. Balance in these accounts (e.g. back to back
margin account) should be reported under this head. After payment is made
on maturity, such transactions are to be reported in the local book and the
respective head shall be adjusted accordingly.

1.2.5. Unsettled Spot Transactions
Amount of unsettled spot sales transactions against firm deal/contract shall
be reported under this head. The particulars of such balances, if reported,
should be mentioned in the footnote. After settlement, such transactions are
to be booked for in the local book and the respective head will be adjusted
accordingly.

1.2.6. Borrowings & Interest Payables




1.2.6.1. Borrowings from Bank/Institution abroad (i.e.
Equity,Loan,Placement)
Any type of Borrowings from Bank/Institution abroad in the form of Equity,
Loan, Placement etc. shall be reported here.

1.2.6.2. Borrowings from Scheduled Banks/Bank's OBU


Any type of Borrowings from domestic scheduled Banks/Bank's OBUs in form
of Equity, Loan, Placement etc. shall be reported here.

1.2.6.3. Borrowings from Central Bank

Any type of Borrowings from Bangladesh Bank shall be reported here.

1.2.6.4. Interest Payables

Amount of interest payable on account of FC denominated liabilities

(including penal interest, if any) should come under this head.


1.2.7. Other FC Liabilities
Other Liabilities in foreign currencies (FC) (not mentioned in 1.2.1. to 1.2.6.) shall be
reported under this head.

1.2.8 Liabilities of Own OBU operation

Liabilities of bank’s own OBU operation shall be reported under this head. This is
additional to the consolidated reporting of Liabilities (1.2.1. to 1.2.7.) for supervising
OBU operation separately.

--- Page 11 ---
10


1.2.8.1 Placement/ Borrowing by OBU operation
Total amount of Placement/ Borrowing by bank’s OBUs shall be reported
here under the below sub-head accordingly.
1.2.8.1.1 Placement/ Borrowing from Parent bank/ DBU operation
Total amount of Placement/ Borrowing from parent bank/ DBU
operation by OBUs shall be reported here under this sub-head.
1.2.8.1.2. Placement/ Borrowing from own OBUs

Total amount of Placement/Borrowing from own OBUs shall be
reported here under this sub-head.
1.2.8.1.3. Placement/ Borrowing from Other OBU
Total amount of Placement/ Borrowing from any other bank’s OBUs
shall be reported here under this sub-head.
1.2.8.1.4. Placement/ Borrowing from Foreign
Total amount of Placement/ Borrowing from foreign or abroad by
OBUs shall be reported here under this sub-head.

1.2.8.1.5. Placement/ Borrowing from Others
Total amount of any other Placement/ Borrowing (not mentioned in
1.2.8.1.1 to 1.2.8.1.4) by OBUs shall be reported here under this sub-
head.

1.2.8.2. Bills Payable

1.2.8.2.1. Accepted Inland Bills Payable



1.2.8.2.2. Accepted Foreign Bills Payable


Against complying presentation of documents, OBUs primarily give
acceptance to pay at the maturity and thus Bills payable (i.e.
accepted deferred/usance bills) are generated. Nonetheless, the
value of accepted inland and foreign bills payable by OBUs (1.2.8.2.1
and 1.2.8.2.2 respectively) shall be reported under the above heads
respectively until or unless the bill is paid or settled. When the
exchange position is prepared before the payment of the bill(s), the
total outstanding amount of accepted bills (foreign and inland
denominated as well as payable in foreign currency) should be
reported under this head. After payment of bills, such transactions
are to be reported in the local book and the respective heads will be
adjusted accordingly.

--- Page 12 ---
11


1.2.8.3. Deposits
Total Balance of FC accounts of customers.

1.2.8.4. Other FC Liabilities


Other FC Liabilities (not mentioned in 1.2.8.1. to 1.2.8.3.) shall be reported

under this head.
1.3. Net position of assets/liabilities
Difference between the total items under 1.1. and total items under 1.2. shall be reported
under this head.

1.4. Forward against contract
Banks offer forward booking to other banks and customers. Currency-wise net outstanding
amount of forward derived from purchase or sale from/to banks/financial institutions and
customers against firm contract shall be reported under this head.
1.5. Contingent liability
Outstanding amount of contingent liabilities: Letter of credit [Inland letter of credit opened
in FC (if any), Inland Back to Back letter of credit, Foreign letter of credit], Letter of
guarantee (including stand-by letter of credit, irrevocable repayment undertaking,
confirmation given to other banks for LCs), Bills for Collection, acceptances, others are to be
reported under this head. However, the amount under this head shall not be considered for
calculation of net exchange position.
1.6.
Overall position (1.3. + 1.4.) (Balance sheet + Off-Balance sheet except Contingent


liabilities)

--- Page 13 ---
12


[B] During the day:

2. Spot/ cash transactions (net) of the day
Spot transaction is a single outright transaction involving the exchange of two
currencies at a rate agreed on the date of the contract for value or delivery (cash
settlement) within two business days. Cash transaction is the transaction involving the
exchange of two currencies at a rate agreed where settlement takes place
immediately (usually in the same day). These are to be reported under this head. To
mention, cash settlement of forward transactions, settlement of near leg and far leg
spot transactions of swap contracts (buy/sell as the case may be) shall be reported
under this head ( Please see below).
3. Forward Position (Net) of the Day

3.1. Forward Transactions (net) during the Day (3.1.1-3.1.2)


Forward transactions involve the exchange of two currencies at a rate agreed on the
date of the contract for value or delivery (cash settlement) at a future date (more
than two business days).
Swap Transaction is a combination of a spot and a forward transaction and involves a
simultaneous purchase and sale of two currencies against each other.
Forward transactions (along with those derived from swap transactions i.e. far legs of
swap transactions) of the day with banks and customers are to be reported under the
above head. However, sales, purchases and settlement of such transactions are to be
reported under different heads as stated in the format.
Transactions derived from swap contracts are to be reported simultaneously under sl.
no. 2 (Spot transactions) and sl. no. 3 (Forward transactions) of the exchange position
statement. The near leg spot transaction of the currency is to be reported under sl.
no. 2 while the far leg of the swap contract is to be reported under sl. no. 3. of the
exchange position statement under the head of forward transactions (purchase or
sale as the case may be). On maturity, the far leg transaction is to be reported under
spot (buy/sell) as reversal of the previous one and to neutralize the forward book
position; the settled transaction amount shall be shown as forward purchase/forward
sale settlement under the respective head under sl. no. 3.
4. Issuance and settlement of contingent liabilities during the day
Issuance and settlement of contingent liabilities during the day (which shall be
excluded for calculation of foreign exchange exposures) like letters of credit and
letters of guarantee, Bills for collection are to be reported under this head.
5. Total spot position of the day
It is the sum of the spot position at the beginning (1.3.) and the Total spot/ cash
transactions (net) during the day (2.6.)

--- Page 14 ---
13


6. Total forward position of the day
It is the sum of the opening forward position of the day (1.4.) with net forward
transactions of the day (3.1.) less net settlement of outstanding forward transactions
during the day (3.2.)
7. Total currency-wise net exchange position of the day
Net Exchange position in a currency is the sum of spot position (Row 5) and forward
position (Row 6) in the respective currency.
8. Total of the Net Long Positions (Column 11) and Total of the Net Short Positions
(Column 12) in equivalent US Dollar

The sum of the net exchange positions of the currencies as indicated in Row 7 having
long position shall be reported at Row 8 and Column 11 of the matrix with ‘+’ (plus)
sign. On the other hand, the sum of the net exchange positions of the currencies as
indicated in Row 7 having short position shall be reported at Row 8 and Column 12 of
the matrix with ‘ –’ (minus) sign.

9. Overall Net Exchange Position in equivalent US Dollar
The overall net exchange position of the bank shall be the ‘total of the net long
positions’ or the ‘total of the net short positions’ (as indicated in Row 8) whichever is
higher. Overall net exchange position thus arrived in equivalent US Dollar shall be
reported at Row 9 and Column 13 of the matrix.
10. Overall Net Exchange Position in equivalent BDT
Overall net exchange position in equivalent BDT shall be reported at the Row 10 and
Column 13 of the matrix.
11. Conversion Rate (Equivalent Taka)
The conversion rates applied by ADs to convert various currencies are to be reported
here (equivalent BDT per respective foreign currency.) To convert currencies, ADs are
advised to use weighted average rate of USD/BDT as declared by FRTMD of
Bangladesh Bank or BAFEDA.

--- Page 15 ---
14


[C] At the end of the day:


Foreign currency Assets and liabilities of DBU and OBU operations at the end of the day
shall be reported under the respective sub-head under this head. Description of subheads is
similar to sub-heads of [A] At the beginning of the day (1.1. to 1.6.).


[D] Additional Information:

D1. Bangladesh Open position limit USD
Currently authorized Open Position Limit (in USD) of the reporting scheduled bank shall be
reported under this head.

D2. Regulatory Capital
Current Regulatory Capital (in USD) of the reporting scheduled bank shall be reported under
this head.

D3. Margin of Irrevocable letter of credit
Consolidated margin amount of Irrevocable letter of credit issued by the reporting scheduled
bank shall be reported under this head.

D4. Endorsement against Credit/Debit cards
Total endorsed value/amount against Credit/Debit cards shall be reported under this head.