--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Investment Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FEID Circular no.01 Date :13/12/2023

Head Offices/ Principal Offices of all
Authorized Dealers in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Issuance of No Objection Certificate (NOC) in favor of Branch, Liaison,
Representative, Project office of foreign companies and notification of
Closure of Bank Accounts.

Please refer to Paragraph 3(c), Chapter 17, Section II of the Guidelines for Foreign
Exchange Transactions-2018 (GFET), Vol-1, FEID Circular Letter No. 01 dated 16-05-2021 and
BRPD Circular No. 23, dated 28/12/2021 which outline the guidelines for Authorized Dealer
(AD) nominated by Branch Offices or Liaison Offices or Representative Offices or Project
Offices (B/L/R/P) established by companies incorporated outside Bangladesh with regard to
dealing with such offices, mode of operation of dormant account and the change of nominated
AD.

To facilitate smoother transactions, ADs shall adhere to the following instructions-

(1) Each B/L/R/P office shall have only one nominated AD through which all inward and
outward remittances have to be executed and all payments payable abroad and
receivable from abroad shall be monitored and reported to Bangladesh Bank.

(2) No payments arising from activities in Bangladesh shall be made or received outside
Bangladesh without general or special permission from Bangladesh Bank and/or
competent authority.

(3) B/L/R/P office can open and operate two or more local currency accounts in different
branches of same bank or any other bank by obtaining NOC from the nominated AD.
Information related to local currency accounts shall be notified to FEID, FEOD and
concerned
offices
of
Bangladesh
Bank
through
the
nominated
AD.
However, the branches operating local currency accounts shall meticulously follow
the instructions in the permission letter regarding debits for local purpose and credits
from local source as well as AML and CFT rules issued by BFIU.

(4) AD shall dispose of application for NOC within 15 days from the date of receipt.

Continued page-02

--- Page 2 ---
(5) ADs and other branches operating local currency account can make an account
dormant in case of long term inactiveness of transactions as per instruction laid down
in BRPD circular No. 23, dated 28-12-2021 and/or expiry of office permission period
subject to compliance of the followings-

a. Branches operating local currency accounts shall give intimation and transfer
the funds lying in the dormant accounts to the nominated AD.

b. The AD shall intimate the dormant status of accounts operated by itself or
other bank’s branches to FEID by the 15th day of next month.

c. If the account remains dormant for a long period, actions have to be taken by
the AD in compliance with provision of Section 35 of Banking Companies
Act, 1991 (amended up to 2023).

Please bring the content of this circular to the notice of all concerned.


Yours Faithfully,


(Abu Saleh Mohammed Shahab Uddin)
Director (FEID)
Phone: +88-02-9530144