--- Page 1 ---
Bangladesh Bank
(Central Bank of Bangladesh)
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh
Foreign Exchange Investment Department
FDIPP-Implementation Unit


FEID Circular Letter No. 03 Date: 27 March 2023


Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Scheduled Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,

Amendment of Operating Guidelines regarding Steering Committee under the Two
Step Loan (TSL) Component of Foreign Direct Investment Promotion Project.
Please refer to Section 1.3.1 and Addendum of the Operating Guidelines for Two Step Loan (TSL)
component of Foreign Direct Investment Promotion Project (FDIPP) read with FEID Circular No. 01 dated 30
August 2017. Section 1.3.1 of the Operating Guidelines has specified composition, functions and meeting
interval of TSC Steering Committee (TSC). Now the following necessary amendments in Section 1.3.1 of the
above mentioned guidelines have been made as per approval of the competent authority.

1.1. The existing composition of TSC will be replaced by the following:

 Chairman:

Secretary of MOF-FID (Executing Agency).

 Members:

Additional Secretary (Project) from MOF-FID,
Concerned Deputy Governor or Executive Director, Bangladesh Bank,
Representative from Prime Minister’s Office (PMO),
Representative from Economic Relations Division (ERD) of MOF,
Representative from Finance Division (FD) of MOF,
Representative from Social Economic Infrastructure Division of Planning Commission (PC),
Representative from Implementation Monitoring and Evaluation Division (IMED) of Ministry
of Planning,
Representative from Bangladesh Economic Zones Authority (BEZA),
(10)
Representative from Bangladesh Investment Development Authority (BIDA),
(11)
Representative from Project Implementation Unit (PIU), Bangladesh Bank,
(12)
Joint Secretary (Project) from MOF-FID,
(13)
Joint Secretary (Project-1) from MOF-FID,
(14)
Representative from Japan-Bangladesh Chamber of Commerce and Industry (JBCCI) and
(15)
Project Director or Coordinator, Bangladesh Bank [FDIPP-Implementation Unit].

 Secretariat:

(16)
Desk/counterpart officer (Project-1) from MOF-FID.

 Observer:

(17)
Representative from Embassy of Japan,
(18)
Representative from JICA.

Continue page 02

--- Page 2 ---
-Page 02-

1.2. The Steering Committee meeting will be held at least once in every six months, but can be held on
an ad-hoc basis if any issue arises to be discussed immediately.

2. All other instructions of the Operating Guidelines will remain unchanged.

The instructions of this Circular Letter shall come into force with immediate effect.


Sincerely Yours,



(Md. Shahidul Islam)
Director (FDIPPIU)
Project Director
Phone: 9530279
email: mshahidul.islam@bb.org.bd