--- Page 1 ---
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh.
Website: www.bb.org.bd

FSD Circular No. 01 Date:

Managing Director/Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,
Revised Guidelines on Stress Testing

Please refer to the DOS Circular No-01 of 23 February 2011 on the captioned subject.

2. In view of burgeoning importance and evolving role of stress testing, changes in the importance
of different risk factors, insights gained from the application of existing stress testing
framework, and international best practices, Bangladesh Bank has revisited stress testing
guidelines. It has been decided that henceforth banks shall carry out stress testing exercise and
submit the report in line with the revised guidelines on quarterly basis, effective from
December 2024.

3. Additionally, banks are advised to simultaneously exercise and report stress test based on
previous and revised templates only for the quarters ends on December 2024 and March 2025.

4. Financial Stability Department (FSD) of Bangladesh Bank shall make the required reporting
template available to the banks in due course. Banks are advised to submit their stress testing
reports to FSD within the last business day of the following month of each quarter-end
using specified MS Excel template (soft copy only) until further instructions.

5. Instructions given in DOS Circular No-01/2011 will be superseded by this circular.

6. This directive is issued in exercise of the power vested in the Section 45 of the Bank Companies
Act, 1991 (amended up to 2023).
Yours Faithfully,

(Dipti Rani Hazra)
Director (FSD)
Phone: 57165905
30 December, 2024
15 Poush, 1431
Financial Stability Department

--- Page 2 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing
December, 2024









Financial Stability Department
Bangladesh Bank

--- Page 3 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024




Acronyms ................................................................................................................................................. ii
Section 1: Overview
1. Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 1
2. Background ......................................................................................................................... 1
3. Applicability ........................................................................................................................ 2
4. Objectives ........................................................................................................................... 2
5. Scope and Coverage ........................................................................................................... 3
Section 2: Stress-testing Framework
6. General ................................................................................................................................ 4
7. Policies, Procedures and Documentation ........................................................................... 5
8. Governance ......................................................................................................................... 5
9. Infrastructure ...................................................................................................................... 6
10. Stress Testing Approaches and Methodologies ................................................................. 7
11. Use of Stress-testing results in Formulating Management Actions ................................... 9
12. Reporting, Communication and Control of Stress-testing results ................................... 10
Section 3: Sensitivity Analysis
13. Credit Risk ......................................................................................................................... 11
14. Market Risk ....................................................................................................................... 13
15. Operational Risk ............................................................................................................... 15
16. Liquidity Risk ..................................................................................................................... 15
Annexure
Annexure 1: District level CVI from highest vulnerability to lowest vulnerability .................... 18
Table of Contents

--- Page 4 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024

ii



Acronyms
BB
Bangladesh Bank
BIS
Bank for International Settlements
BL
Bad and Loss
BoD
Board of Directors
CRAR
Capital to Risk-weighted Assets Ratio
CRR
Cash Reserve Ratio
CVI
Climate Vulnerability Index
DF
Doubtful
DSIBs
Domestic Systemically Important Banks
HQLA
High-Quality Liquid Assets
LCR
Liquidity Coverage Ratio
MATs
Management Action Triggers
NPLs
Non-performing Loans
NPLIR
NPL Inflow Ratio
RMC
Risk Management Committee
RSA
Rate Sensitive Assets
RSL
Rate Sensitive Liabilities
SLR
Statutory Liquidity Ratio
SS
Sub-Standard
ST
Stress Testing

--- Page 5 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024


Section 1: Overview
1. Introduction
1.1 These stress testing guidelines have been issued by Bangladesh Bank (BB) under
section 45 of the ‘Bank Company Act, 1991 (amended up to 2023)’ and extended a
structured way of assessing the vulnerabilities of scheduled banks to extreme but
plausible economic and financial conditions. These guidelines would enable banks to
accurately identify, and measure key risks as well as define their ‘risk appetite’ and
also provide critical information to senior management for decisions regarding capital
allocation and contingency planning.
1.2 Stress testing is an essential risk management tool used to assess a bank’s potential
vulnerabilities during stressed economic and financial conditions. According to Bank
for International Settlements (BIS), stress test is a forward-looking exercise that aims
to evaluate the impact of severe but plausible adverse scenarios on the resilience of
financial institutions. It involves the use of models and data at the individual financial
institution level or system-wide level and may rely on historical or hypothetical
scenarios. Through forward looking assessment of risks, it enables a bank to
overcome the limitations of statistical models-based risk measures that consider
historical data and assumptions. It helps senior management to understand the
condition of a bank in the stressed situation and facilitates internal and external
communication regarding banks’ financial condition.

2. Background
Considering the importance and complexity of the methodology of stress testing, BB
issued the first guidelines on stress testing in 2010, which were mandatory for banks
and finance companies. Later, the revised guidelines were issued in February 2011,
which were solely applicable for schedule banks operationalizing in Bangladesh. The
later guidelines were mainly designed to align with Basel III capital framework and
also to address key weaknesses in stress testing practices that were highlighted after
the global financial crisis. Since then, the role of stress testing has rapidly evolved and
grown in importance in many jurisdictions including systemic risk and liquidity risk
management. Now-a-days, stress testing is a critical element of risk management for
financial institutions and a core tool to identify the vulnerabilities for macro-
prudential authorities and banking supervisors. Moreover, the climate change related
physical and transition risks have also been increased in recent times, which may
affect the safety and soundness of individual banks as well as the banking system and

--- Page 6 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024


could have broader implications on financial stability. In light of the above
developments as well as the insights gained from the application of existing
framework, BB has prepared a revised suite of stress testing guidelines and
rationalized the shock scenarios to strengthen the existing stress testing framework
in line with contemporary domestic and global developments.

3. Applicability
3.1 These guidelines shall be applicable to all scheduled banks in accordance with the
following:
(a) On an individual bank level, referring to the global operations of the bank (i.e.
including its overseas branch operations) on a solo basis; and
(b) On a consolidated level which includes entities covered under the entity level
requirement, and the consolidation of all financial and non-financial subsidiaries.
3.2 Scheduled banks shall perform the stress testing exercises in line with the revised
stress testing guidelines on quarterly basis.

4. Objectives
4.1 The stress testing exercise shall be a forward-looking exercise and a primary tool of
risk identification and monitoring at the individual financial institution level. Stress
tests should complement the existing complex and quantitative models-based risk
management approaches that are using historical data and estimated statistical
relationships.
4.2 The stress test results shall be reported to and discussed in the Risk Management
Committee (RMC) and Board of Directors (BoD) on regular basis and shall be used as
a crucial input in formulating strategic objectives and decisions. Banks shall use the
stress testing results to calibrate risk appetite, capital planning, liquidity and funding
risk assessment, contingency planning, and recovery/resolution planning. The results
shall also be used to support internal capital and liquidity adequacy assessments,
portfolio management and new product/trade approval processes.
4.3 From the risk management perspective, the stress test analysis generally considers
certain indicators, e.g. CRAR and liquidity ratios, to quantify the impact of relevant
risks. These indicators should be compared to regulatory requirements in order to
identify vulnerabilities. Other risk indicators may include change in level of profit,

--- Page 7 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024


regulatory capital, risk-weighted assets, asset values, cash flows, loan loss provisions
and level of non-performing loans. These would help in gauging the level and severity
of emerging vulnerabilities and formulating suitable plans to address these potential
weaknesses.

5. Scope and Coverage
5.1 The revised guidelines cover the significant activities undertaken by a bank and
consider almost all material risks affecting the bank. Material risks refer to the risks
that potentially have a significant adverse impact on any significant activity and
overall financial condition of a bank. The shocks covered in this stress testing exercise
could arise mainly due to credit, market, operational and liquidity risks.

5.2 Although, the banks are encouraged to assess their business portfolios under stressed
scenario(s) considering a range of relevant risk factors, they are required to conduct
sensitivity analysis taking into account credit, market, operational and liquidity risks.
The impact of shocks would be translated to the solvency through profitability and
capital position of the bank. For assessment and inference, the after-shock capital
adequacy ratio would be gauged against the relevant regulatory benchmarks.

5.3 Macro-prudential stress test would cover some large and Domestic Systemically
Important Banks (DSIBs), which shall be conducted by Bangladesh Bank. It aims to
assess the impact of extreme but plausible macroeconomic scenarios on the bank’s
risk profile using econometric modeling techniques.

5.4 The risk identification and assessment process should cover every aspect of banks’
risk profile including sector, borrower and depositor specific risk, on- and off-balance
sheet exposures, etc.

5.5 Beside regular iterations of ST analysis prescribed by these guidelines, these are
flexible enough to facilitate banks to conduct ad-hoc stress tests for situational or
institutional specific demand. Banks are encouraged to conduct ad-hoc and more
frequent stress tests on specific risk areas in response to emerging risks and during
periods of heightened market volatility and economic uncertainty.

--- Page 8 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024


Section 2: Stress-testing Framework
6. General
6.1 Every schedule bank shall establish a rigorous and forward-looking stress testing
framework that is commensurate with the nature, size and complexity of its business
operations and risk profile.
6.2 Stress testing should be integral part of a bank’s internal risk management and capital
adequacy assessment process. The quality and comprehensiveness of data being used
for stress tests, the robustness of methodologies, involvement of business lines,
control and compliance functions in the design and implementation of the stress test
program, and the use of stress test results to inform business and risk strategies are
some essentials to ensure this process.
6.3 Specific uses of stress testing include:
(a) Providing an impact assessment of risk exposures under stressed situations and
enabling the development of appropriate management actions and contingency plans
(including recovery and resolution arrangements) across a range of stressed
scenarios or sensitivity analyses;
(b) Setting as an input in the banks’ risk appetite and determining whether its risk
exposures are within the stated risk appetite under stressed conditions;
(c) Complementing risk assessments by capturing potential extreme losses (tail risk)
beyond those calculated by risk measurement models that rely on historical data and
assumptions;
(d) Assessing the appropriateness of the bank’s capital management plans;
(e) Identifying, measuring and controlling risk concentrations;
(f) Strategic planning and forecasting;
(g) Managing portfolio in a proactive procedure;
(h) Management of assets and liabilities considering their maturity profiles; and
(i) Supporting internal and external communications regarding the bank’s financial
and liquidity condition, particularly during the periods of heightened market volatility
and economic uncertainty.

--- Page 9 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024


7. Policies, Procedures and Documentation
7.1 The stress testing program shall be supported by appropriately documented internal
policies and procedures.

7.2 A bank shall establish following policies and procedures to govern its stress testing
program:
(a) Types of stress testing and the major objectives of each component of the stress
testing program;
(b) Oversight arrangements including the roles and responsibilities of the board,
senior management and relevant department heads including risk management,
treasury, compliance and internal audit departments;
(c) Frequency of stress testing exercises consistent with the size and nature of the
business, and the types of stress testing and their purpose;
(d) Methodologies used for stress testing incorporating different types of risk and
development of relevant scenarios; and
(e) A range of Management Action Triggers (MATs) and remedial actions envisaged
corresponding to the purpose, type and results of stress test.

7.3 A bank shall retain accurate, and up-to-date documentation on all aspects of its stress
testing program, including:
(a) Description of the underlying assumptions and fundamental elements of each
stress testing scenario. These include the reasoning and judgments behind the chosen
scenarios and their degree of severity;
(b) Results of stress testing exercises according to different level of shock scenarios;
and
(c) Board and senior management’s deliberations and decisions on the appropriate
management actions to address the risks and vulnerabilities identified from the stress
testing exercise.
8. Governance
8.1 The ultimate responsibility for overall stress testing program rests with the board of
directors of the bank and with the Chief Executive Officer/Country Head in case of
foreign banks. Senior management shall be accountable for the ST program's
implementation, management and oversight.

--- Page 10 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024


8.2 The board should actively participate and contribute in setting objectives of stress
testing, defining scenarios, discussing the results of stress tests in the context of
bank’s risk profile, assessing potential actions and decision making.

8.3 Senior management should make the BoD aware about the methodologies used and
the limitations of underlying assumptions of stress testing program, and the impact of
stress tests. It is thus important that senior management participates in the review
and identification of potential stress scenarios and contributes to risk mitigating
strategies.

8.4 To promote risk identification and control, stress testing should be included in risk
management activities of a bank at various levels of aggregation or complexity. This
includes the use of stress testing for the risk management of individual or group of
borrowers, portfolio risk management, as well as risk management of business lines
or business strategy. In summary, it should be used to address both existing and
potential enterprise-wide risk exposures and concentrations.

8.5 Stress tests should be used as an input for setting the risk appetite of the bank or
setting exposure limits and to support the evaluation of strategic choices when
undertaking and discussing longer term business planning. Importantly, stress tests
should be integral part of the capital and liquidity planning process.

9. Infrastructure
9.1 The data utilized in stress testing should be accurate, complete and accessible in a
timely manner. The granularity level of data depends on the types and frequency of ST
exercise. The data infrastructure should be flexible enough to support targeted and
customized stress tests. Banks should regularly assess the quality and reliability of the
data and IT infrastructure as part of continual review of their stress testing
framework. The Board of Directors (BoD) shall ensure that effective policies,
procedures and tools are in place to identify and address material information
deficiencies.

9.2 The Risk Management Committee (RMC) should ensure that an appropriate
organizational structure is in place to properly execute the ST framework on regular
basis. Any observed shortcomings in the ST structure and framework should be
brought to the attention of the BoD. Importantly, the ST staffs need to be adequately
skilled and have the access to resources/tools needed to perform assigned tasks
effectively. Especially, the ST team should have sound knowledge on risk

--- Page 11 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024


management, macroeconomic aspects, financial accounting, econometrics, and be
conversant with rules and regulations issued by regulators. The delegation of tasks
and responsibilities should be well documented and conveyed to the entire team.

10. Stress Testing Approaches and Methodologies
10.1 Stress testing exercise must cover a wide range of scenarios, including foreseeable
changes in the bank's portfolio composition, new information, developments in
operating conditions, and emerging risks that are not necessarily covered by
historical events.

10.2 The stressed parameters must be conservative and up-to date in order to prevent
underestimation of risk. For instance, a bank's risk profile may become more
vulnerable due to entering into new markets or high-risk segments. Macro-financial
trends (for example, rising policy rate over time) may abruptly increase the risk
profile of a bank's credit portfolio in the future, which may not be adequately
captured by prior shock scenarios.

10.3 The identification of significant stress events, the use of sound modelling techniques,
and the proper implementation of stress testing results necessitate the participation
of several senior experts inside a bank. The unit in charge of implementing the stress
testing program should organize appropriate dialogue among those experts, challenge
their opinions, check them for consistency (e.g., with other relevant stress tests), and
make decisions on the ST framework design and implementation, ensuring a balance
of usefulness, accuracy, comprehensiveness, and tractability.

10.4 The stress testing framework is generally based on quantitative measurement
approach. A bank shall develop quantitative techniques to risk measurement that
accurately reflect industry-accepted methodologies and standards. Risk and loss
estimates should be based on accurate data.

10.5 Banks must ensure that the data utilized for stress testing is reflective of and contains
risk characteristics of the bank's unique products or risk profile. Proxy estimates can
be utilized when there is insufficient or limited data. However, the bank shall apply a
margin of conservatism based on expert judgment to the proxy estimates.

10.6 These revised ST guidelines cover two strands of methodologies: Sensitivity Analysis
and Scenario Analysis. Usually, however, macroprudential stress testing framework of
Bangladesh Bank will apply the scenario analysis.

--- Page 12 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024



10.7 Sensitivity analysis is used to provide an initial assessment of a portfolio's
vulnerability to a single risk factor or a group of closely related risks. The risk factors
are subjected to varying degrees of severity to better understand the bank's true
weaknesses and the non-linear influence of events on loss profiles of the institution.
The severity is either assumed hypothetically or calculated from historical
maximums or minimums.

10.8 Sensitivity analysis assesses the effect of predefined changes in a single risk factor,
such as NPL Inflow Ratio (NPLIR), interest rates, exchange rates, or equity prices, on
a bank's financial condition. In most sensitivity analyses, the source of the shock on
risk variables is not identified, and the underlying relationship or correlation
between different risk factors is either not considered or discarded. For instance, the
adverse impacts of changes in interest rates and exchange rates on bank’s
profitability are considered independently, disregarding their interconnection, to
simplify the stress testing process. These tests are relatively quick to execute and
provide an approximation of the bank's vulnerability to predefined changes in
specific risk factors or combination of risk factors.

10.9 Banks should identify relevant risk drivers in particular: credit risk drivers (e.g.
impact of credit concentration in specific sector or single borrower, a significant
increase or shift in NPLIR, etc.), market risk drivers (e.g. increasing volatility in
interest rates, foreign exchange rates and stock markets, etc.), liquidity risk drivers
(e.g. deposit withdrawal by top depositors or in excess of normal withdrawal, etc.)
and operational risk drivers (e.g. natural disaster, cyber-attack, failure of
communication systems across the entire region/country, etc.).

10.10 Banks should then assess the impact of identified risk drivers in adverse condition
with varying degrees of severities: minor, moderate, and major.

10.11 The banks should evaluate the levels of after-shock CRAR. If the after-shock CRAR
found to be below the regulatory limits under minor credit, market and operational
scenarios, banks may consider taking risk management actions to improve their risk
profiles. Likewise, if the after-shock level of liquid assets becomes negative, and/or
the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) falls below their regulatory minimums in
liquidity scenarios, banks should take risk mitigation actions to strengthen their
liquidity profiles.

--- Page 13 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024


11. Use of Stress-testing results in Formulating Management Actions
11.1 The stress testing results must be discussed in the Risk Management Committee
(RMC). Apart from discussions in the RMC, the bank must present detailed findings
along with methodologies to the Board of Directors (BoD), following the preparation
and reporting of the stress testing results.

11.2 The senior management of the bank must assess the impact of stress testing on
accounting profit and loss, regulatory capital and risk weighted assets, liquidity and
funding positions.

11.3 Banks shall set triggers and formulate realistic management actions based on stress
testing results, having concerns to:
(a) Types of actions and specific circumstances, such as external factors, that make
management actions difficult to materialize;
(b) Whether the actions would be aligned with the risk appetite or risk tolerance level
set by the board;
(c) Whether the bank has sufficient financial resources and operational capabilities to
undertake such management actions; and
(d) Supervisory or regulatory obligations, as well as market limits, might impose
constraints.

11.4 Management actions of banks should be based on careful analyses and deliberation by
the board and senior management. The range of management actions/interventions
may vary depending on the extent of impact and likelihood of stressed
scenarios/events. Management actions should be proportionate to the severity of the
stress tests' impact, and they may include:
(a) Reviewing the risk appetite or risk tolerance limits and business strategies;
(b) Restructuring, liquidating, unwinding or hedging exposures;
(c) Seeking additional collateral, reducing risk exposures to specific sectors,
borrowers and regions;
(d) Reorganizing the asset and liability composition;
(e) Building additional capital or liquidity buffers;
(f) Re-sourcing to central bank funding facilities; and
(g) Implementing contingency plans (including recovery or resolution arrangements).

--- Page 14 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024

10


11.5 Management actions must be approved by the board and senior management, and
properly documented. Senior management must ensure effective monitoring
mechanisms are in place to promptly activate management actions based on
predetermined Management Action Triggers (MATs). Roles and responsibilities must
be clearly defined and assigned to ensure prompt reporting to the board and senior
management upon the occurrence of any trigger event. RMC will perform periodic
reviews of management action activation protocols/procedures to ensure that such
management actions are carried out in a timely and orderly manner.
12. Reporting, Communication and Control of Stress-testing results
12.1 The scheduled banks must conduct stress testing at least on quarterly basis i.e. on
March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. Banks must submit their stress
testing reports within the last business day of the following month of each quarter-
end by using the specified excel format provided by Bangladesh Bank. The report
must include the name, designation, and contact information (preferably cell number)
of two concerned officials in case further inquiries arise.

12.2 Banks should properly disseminate the ST framework and findings within the
institution to seek feedback from appropriate levels of the hierarchy. Banks should
also ensure that the interpretation of ST findings is easily understandable and
transparent at all levels.

12.3 Banks are encouraged to include the stress test results, at least those in regard to
market risk, in their annual reports to demonstrate their sensitivity and resilience to
various types and levels of shocks.

12.4 Banks are advised to keep proper records regarding data used for stress testing and
their outcomes, RMC and/or BoD meeting minutes, measures taken to resolve
material vulnerabilities, and so on for random verification by Bangladesh Bank
inspection teams.

--- Page 15 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024

11

Section 3: Sensitivity Analysis
13. Credit Risk
13.1 The purpose of stress test for the credit risk is to evaluate how both macroeconomic
and bank-specific factors affect the bank's financial performance, including capital
adequacy and profitability. During an economic downturn, banks face increased risk
from several factors such as increase in repayment risk, decline in asset quality, and
reduction in collateral value. Conversely, in an economic upturn, there may be a
tendency toward underpricing of risks, leading to rapid credit growth in certain high-
risk sectors. To manage these, banks should consider adjusting provisions or
increasing risk weights on exposures in these sensitive sectors, particularly to
account for heightened sectoral credit growth during economic upturns. Given this
context, banks should, at a minimum, conduct the following stress tests on their credit
portfolios to evaluate resilience against these potential risks.
13.2 Steps for Addressing Credit Risk Shocks by Banks
1. For each shock scenario, determine the additional provisioning requirements,
taking into account any eligible collateral that may offset the defaulted portfolio.
2. Apply provisioning rates by classification category in adherence to the regulatory
requirements set by Bangladesh Bank from time to time.
3. Compute after-shock Capital to Risk-weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR).
Shock 1: Increase in NPLs
This shock estimates the impact of downgrading a portion of the total performing
loans directly to bad and loss category by applying the following three levels of
hypothetical shocks:
(i) Minor shock: Increase in Non-performing Loans (NPLs) by either ‘03 percent’ or
‘an average of the latest five (05) quarters NPL inflow ratio (NPLIR) of the respective
bank’, whichever is higher;
(ii) Moderate shock: Increase in NPLs by two times of the percentage determined in
the subsection (i) of Shock 1; and
(iii) Major shock: Increase in NPLs by three times of the percentage determined in the
subsection (i) of Shock 1.

--- Page 16 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024

12

Following formula should be used to calculate NPL inflow ratio (NPLIR) of each
quarter:


Here,
NPLIt = NPL inflow or new NPLs during the quarter t
Loanst-1 = Total outstanding loans at the end of previous quarter (t-1)
NPLst-1 = Total NPLs at the end of previous quarter (t-1)

Shock 2: Increase in NPLs in top 02 sectors
This shock is applied to the concentration risk particularly in top two (02) sectors,
where the bank has the highest investment or exposure. The scenarios of this shock
are constituted assuming that a certain portion of performing loans of the top 02
sectors directly downgraded to bad and loss category by applying the following three
levels of hypothetical shocks:
(i) Increase in Non-performing Loans (NPLs) by either ’03 percent’ or ‘an average of
the latest five (05) quarters’ NPLIR of the respective bank’, whichever is higher
(Minor);
(ii) Increase in NPLs by two times of the percentage determined in the subsection (i)
of Shock 2 (Moderate); and
(iii) Increase in NPLs by three times of the percentage determined in the subsection
(i) of Shock 2 (Major).

Shock 3: Increase in NPLs due to default of top borrowers
This shock intends to ascertain the risk of credit concentration by assuming that a
number of top borrowers of a bank may default due to various reasons creating a
shocking event to the bank. Banks should estimate the additional provisioning against
the default of their top 2 (Minor), top 3 (Moderate), and top 5 (Major) performing
borrowers, selected based on the amount of on- and off-balance sheet exposure. Bank
shall calculate the exposure of top borrowers by applying the conversion factors
stated in BRPD Circular No.01 dated January 16, 2022. In all cases the performing
loans of the respective borrowers are assumed to be directly downgraded to bad and
loss category.

NPLIRt =
NPLIt
Loanst-1 – NPLst-1

--- Page 17 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024

13

Shock 4: Depletion in collateral
This includes three (03) standard scenarios assuming different levels of shocks i.e.
depletion in the value of eligible collateral creating shock events to the bank. The
standard levels of shocks are 30% (Minor), 40% (Moderate), and 50% (Major)
decrease in the value of eligible collateral.

Shock 5: Negative shift in the NPLs categories
The scenarios of this shock are constituted assuming that negative shifts in existing
NPLs categories i.e. Sub-Standard (SS) to Doubtful (DF), and DF to Bad and Loss (BL)
take place due to some unfavorable domestic and/or cross border incident creating
shocking events for the bank which results in some more provision requirements.
Three (03) standard shocks are 10% (Minor), 15% (Moderate), and 20% (Major)
downward shift in the NPLs’ categories.

Shock 6: Negative shift in rating categories
In a downturn, a bank’s counterparties may suffer credit rating downgrade awarded
by an external credit rating agency or internal credit officers. Banks should estimate
the additional provisioning against the negative shift in the rating categories of on-
and off-balance sheet exposure by 10% (Minor), 20% (Moderate), and 30% (Major).

14. Market Risk
The stress test for market risk aims to assess the impact of adverse market
conditions on the banks’ income statement.

Shock 1: Changes in interest rate
Interest rate risk is the potential that the value of the on-balance sheet and the off-
balance sheet positions of the bank would be negatively affected by the change in the
interest rates. The vulnerability of the bank towards the adverse movements of the
interest rate can be gauged by using 2% (Minor), 3% (Moderate), and 4% (Major)
changes in interest rate. Banks shall consider only Held-for-Trading (HFT) portion of
the securities while calculating the re-pricing impact.

--- Page 18 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024

14

The banks should follow the steps mentioned below in carrying out the interest rate
stress tests:
 Calculate all Rate Sensitive Assets (RSA) and Rate Sensitive Liabilities (RSL);
 Plot the RSA and RSL into different time buckets on the basis of maturity;
 Calculate maturity GAP by deducting RSL from RSA (GAP= RSA - RSL); and
 Calculate the impact of interest rate change (∆i) on net interest income (NII)
by using the formula of ∆NII =∆i(GAP).

Shock 2: Exchange Rate Shock
The stress test for exchange rate assesses the impact of change in the exchange rate
on bank’s balance sheet. To assess foreign exchange risk, the overall net exchange
position of the bank, including the on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet exposures,
shall be charged by 20%, 30% and 40% for minor, moderate and major levels
respectively. The overall net exchange position shall be the 'total of the net long
positions' or the 'total of the net short positions' whichever is higher following the FE
Circular No.03 dated February 07, 2022. The impact of the respective shocks shall be
calibrated in terms of the CRAR.

Shock 3: Equity Price Shock
The stress test for equity price risk assesses the impact of a decline in the stock
market index on a bank's balance sheet. For this assessment, shocks are applied to all
securities listed on stock exchanges, including shares, bills/bonds/debentures,
mutual funds, and other similar instruments, whether on-balance sheet or off-balance
sheet. The shocks assume a decrease in current market value by 30%, 40%, and 50%
for minor, moderate, and major stress levels, respectively. The impact of resultant loss
shall be calibrated in the CRAR.

Combined Shock
Banks shall assess the combined shock by aggregating the results of all credit risk and
market risk-related shocks. Different weights shall be applied on the changes in CRAR
due to different types of shocks. Weights for Increase in NPLs, Increase in NPLs in top
02 sectors, Default of top borrowers, Depletion in collateral, Negative shift in the NPLs
categories and Negative shift in rating categories shall be 25%, 0%, 45%, 10%, 10%
and 10%, respectively. 100% weight shall be applied for each market risk-related
shocks.

--- Page 19 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024

15

15. Operational Risk
Operational risk usually arises from four different sources: people, processes,
systems, or external events. In many cases, operational risk occurs outside the
banking company (e.g. natural disasters for climate change). Operational risk can
never be fully eliminated, and bank management must identify the tolerable level of
operational risk. These guidelines, for the time being, kept the adverse impact from
such risk beyond consideration of calibration in the CRAR.
Shock 1: Impact of Climate Shock
Bangladesh is one of the most vulnerable countries to the adverse impacts of climate
change. Natural disasters like floods may adversely impact the loan portfolio of the
banks if they invest in flood-prone areas without taking into account mitigation
strategies. This shock assumes that 3% (Minor), 6% (Moderate), and 9% (Major) of
climate-vulnerable loans are directly downgraded to bad and loss category.
The banks should follow the steps mentioned below in carrying out the climate risk
stress tests:
i) Calculate the total amount of climate vulnerable loans by applying district-wise
climate vulnerability index (CVI) mentioned in annexure-1. All the performing
loans in a district should be considered to apply the CVI using the following
formula:
Bank loans vulnerable to Climate Change = CVI x Total outstanding of
performing loans and advances in the respective district
ii) Apply different levels of shocks to determine the amount of additional provision
requirement.

16. Liquidity Risk
A bank's liquidity adequacy largely depends on its ability to fulfill obligations during a
funding crisis. Therefore, in addition to conducting cash-flow projections to monitor
net funding requirements under normal business conditions, banks should perform
stress tests regularly by conducting projections based on “what if” scenarios on their
liquidity positions to ensure that current liquidity risk exposures remain in
accordance with the established liquidity risk tolerance and identify sources of
potential liquidity strain.

--- Page 20 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024

16

Shock 1: Withdrawal of deposits over a given period
This shock delineates how many days a bank would be able to withstand a liquidity
drain without resorting to liquidity support from outside (other banks or the central
bank). The considerable terms for liquidity stress test are as follows:
 Chronic withdrawal of demand and time deposits both in local and foreign
currency.
 A bank would be considered as a liquid bank if it could survive consecutive five
working days under the stressed situation.
The shock assumes withdrawal of the deposits (both demand and time deposits) in
addition to bank's normal withdrawal1 for consecutive five working days as per the
following:
 Additional 2% withdrawal of remaining deposits on Day 1;
 Additional 3% withdrawal of remaining deposits on Day 2;
 Additional 4% withdrawal of remaining deposits on Day 3;
 Additional 5% withdrawal of remaining deposits on Day 4; and
 Additional 6% withdrawal of remaining deposits on Day 5.
The deposit withdrawal amount (cash outflows) should be deducted from the liquid
assets (cash inflow), net of CRR and SLR. The remaining level of liquid assets needs to
be calculated at the end of each day to assess the bank's liquidity position.
Shock 2: Withdrawal by top depositors
This scenario estimates the impact of deposit concentration on the resilience of a
bank by assuming a withdrawal by top depositors. Three different levels of shocks
assume complete withdrawals by top 10 (Minor), top 15 (Moderate), and top 20
(Major) depositors respectively. In order to meet the assumed withdrawals, liquid
assets would be utilized, and after-shock liquid assets to total assets ratio shall be
calculated to assess bank’s ability to withstand the shock.

1Normal withdrawal refers to average daily withdrawal of demand and time deposits during the
reporting quarter.

--- Page 21 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024

17

Shock 3: Shock to Liquidity Coverage Ratio
The LCR is defined as



Banks should calculate after-shock LCR by using each of the following three scenarios:
(i) Applying 5% haircut to the value of investments in Government Securities while
calculating HQLA and increasing the amount of ‘Total Net Cash Outflows’ by 5%
(Minor);
(ii) Applying 10% haircut to the value of investments in Government Securities while
calculating HQLA and increasing the amount of ‘Total Net Cash Outflows’ by 10%
(Moderate); and
(iii) Applying 15% haircut to the value of investments in Government Securities while
calculating HQLA and increasing the amount of ‘Total Net Cash Outflows’ by 15%
(Major).
LCR =
High-Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA)
Total Net Cash Outflows over the next 30 Calendar Days

--- Page 22 ---
Guidelines on Stress Testing 2024

18

Annexure
Annexure 1: District level CVI from highest vulnerability to lowest vulnerability
Serial No.
District
CVI
Serial No.
District
CVI
Patuakhali
0.44
33
Lakshmipur
0.51
Bandarban
0.46
34
Narail
0.47
Barishal
0.52
35
Pabna
0.51
Bhola
0.44
36
Rajshahi
0.51
Gaibandha
0.47
37
Manikganj
0.50
Rangamati
0.53
38
Jashore
0.50
Khulna
0.51
39
Chandpur
0.49
Bagerhat
0.43
40
Habiganj
0.44
Cox’s Bazar
0.53
41
Meherpur
0.47
10
Khagrachari
0.48
42
Rajbari
0.46
11
Netrokona
0.49
43
Magura
0.47
12
Nilphamari
0.46
44
Natore
0.49
13
Barguna
0.48
45
Gopalganj
0.52
14
Dinajpur
0.51
46
Chattogram
0.48
15
Jamalpur
0.51
47
Shariatpur
0.48
16
Kurigram
0.50
48
Kushtia
0.49
17
Mymensingh
0.47
49
Lalmonirhat
0.44
18
Rangpur
0.53
50
Cumilla
0.47
19
Satkhira
0.45
51
Jhenaidah
0.48
20
Sunamganj
0.53
52
Chuadanga
0.52
21
Naogaon
0.55
53
Faridpur
0.47
22
Pirojpur
0.52
54
Joypurhat
0.47
23
Sherpur
0.51
55
Dhaka
0.46
24
Tangail
0.50
56
Sylhet
0.47
25
Thakurgaon
0.43
57
Moulvibazar
0.46
26
Bogura
0.52
58
Feni
0.46
27
Kishoreganj
0.57
59
Narsingdi
0.52
28
Noakhali
0.44
60
Gazipur
0.46
29
Panchagarh
0.49
61
Madaripur
0.46
30
Sirajgonj
0.51
62
Brahmanbaria
0.44
31
Chapainawabganj
0.50
63
Narayanganj
0.42
32
Jhalakathi
0.47
64
Munshiganj
0.41
Source: Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI) for Bangladesh, United Nations Development Program.