--- Page 1 ---
Student Banking Guidelines

Financial Inclusion Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office

February 2026

--- Page 2 ---
Editorial Committee

Chief Advisor

Dr. Ahsan H. Mansur, Governor

Advisors
Dr. Md. Habibur Rahman, Deputy Governor

Rup Ratan Pine, Executive Director

Co-Ordinators
Md. Iqbal Mohasin, Director (FID)
Abeda Rahim, Additional Director
Qazi Mutmainna Tahmida, Additional Director
Md. Ali Hossain, Additional Director

Hasan Kazi Taufikur Rahman, Additional Director

Team Members

Golam Sarowar Nisat Afroz Binny
Joint Director Joint Director

Md. Mahabub-Ul Alam Muhammad Obaidur Rashid
Deputy Director Deputy Director

Md. Imrul Hasan
Assistant Director

--- Page 3 ---
Introduction

Financial inclusion is a key strategy for accelerating the overall economic development of a
country. Recognizing its importance for ensuring the economic well-being of the people of
Bangladesh, particularly those who are unbanked and underserved, the National Financial
Inclusion Strategy of Bangladesh puts strong emphasis on achieving full financial inclusion for
all adult citizens by June 2026. Bringing citizens under accessible banking and financial services,
and especially familiarizing the young generation with banking practices from an early age, is
essential for strengthening their long-term financial security and financial capability.

Bangladesh Bank has already undertaken various initiatives to promote financial inclusion and
financial literacy in the banking sector. Among these, the School Banking Program is a
significant milestone. With the objective of involving students in economic activities, integrating
them into the formal financial system, nurturing saving habit among students under the age of
18, and familiarizing them with modern banking services and technologies, Bangladesh Bank
launched the School Banking initiative in 2010 and issued a comprehensive guideline on School
Banking in 2013. Through this effort, nearly half a crore students have been brought under the
banking system. The initiative not only helps developing saving habit but also fosters financial
awareness, creating future informed banking customers who will help build a strong and
sustainable financial sector.

In the present time, the rapid expansion of information technology and advancement of digital
banking services has opened new opportunities for students. Transitioning student banking
activities to modern, technology-enabled platforms will prepare them for the future financial
ecosystem. At the same time, enhancing financial literacy is crucial for developing young
people’s ability to make informed and responsible financial decisions.

In this context, it has become essential to formulate a timely, comprehensive, and well-structured
guideline to make students’ financial inclusion activities more effective, structured and policy
oriented. This guideline will establish a uniform policy framework for all banks, ensuring
accessible, safe, affordable, and technology-driven banking services for students. At the same
time, this initiative isexpected to contribute to increasing national savings, expanding financial
awareness, and shaping future generations as skilled financial planner and responsible citizens.

Implementation of this guideline will increase youth participation in the financial sector,
resulting in positive and long-term contributions to the country’s socio-economic development.

--- Page 4 ---
Table of Content

01 [01000308725 উকি উন ]
02. Eligible 51005707357500171555555575587750175555555757877571555855755555155575577555577585858 1
03. General Guidelines on Student 7301010110...........১.১.১০১১১০১০১০১০০০০০০১০০১০১১০০০০১০১০০১১১০০১০১১০১১১১০১০০১১১০১০১০৭ 1-3
OA; NAtUPSIOE ACCOURE..:, ccarcecsersssnnneetsrersensenarneeransnanensnssgombodnnseapavonenes কর ১৮ 4
9510255514০ 4
06. Source of Funds of the ১০০০0170106] .........১.,০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০১০০০০৯০০০০১০১০০০০১০০০৭ 4
OF AHighest:Interest/ Pro tetexcteverstevelisvrecns 52575525875 4
08. Disbursement of Scholarships/Stipends and Collection of Tuition/Fees through Student
৪1101057800] 5
OD. Online; Banking... রন মর 5
10. Facilities for International Transactions for Young (18-25 Years Old) Students................. 5-6
11. Operation of Student Banking Services with at Least One Educational Institution per Bank
Branch/Sub- Branch js cssveessvevsse যা 55887751757857815577754778875558 6
12. Enhancement of Financial Literacy among Students............:sssssssescsesesesesseeesessseseseseseeeeteeneees 6
13. Provision of Student Banking Services through Booths/ Mobile Counters/ Sub-Branches/

58601705712 রনির রিভার 6
14. Priority for Marginalized Communities, Small Ethnic Groups, Female Students, and
Secondary-Level Students ..........-০০০০০০০০৮০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০৭ 6
USA Centyen CAS Ibes 47 রির রর রিবা রনির জর 6-7
16: Education: Insurance 'scsicesscsesvsrsbsesvicesvesveassvasnverepesnivartenvtarreyenauenanmbensendiadamonnemseuretucentaisy qi
17. Human Resource Development and Employment Generation ..........০,,০,০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ 7
18. Regarding the operation of student banking 9০11৬1199.........০-০০০০০৮০৮০০০০০০৮০০০০৮০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ 8
19. Reporting and 1৬101010011105..,.,555৮5৮555৮5৮5৮5৮5৮5-5৮5০5৮০৮০৮০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ 8
20591075274 8

--- Page 5 ---
01. Purpose:

02.






To enhance students’ financial inclusion by involving them in formal banking activities
and by familiarizing them with modern banking services and technologies, thereby
creating a culture of savings.

To deliver student banking services in a transparent, responsible, and proactive manner so
that they can reach and benefit the student community effectively.

To simplify banking functions including loans, scholarships, and _ international
transactions etc. for students in higher education (colleges and universities) and to safely
manage income earned through freelancing, part-time jobs, or other legitimate sources by
introducing an expanded version of School Banking under the name “Student Banking”.
This initiative aims to enhance students’ financial inclusion, digital banking proficiency
and saving habit.

To develop a simplified and user-friendly Student Banking Guidelines in line with the
implementation framework following the Financial Literacy Guidelines/education
directives/policies in Bangladesh.

To enhance students’ financial capability, financial decision-making © skills,
entrepreneurial potential, and overall inclusivity especially for underprivileged students,
thereby nurturing a confident and financially responsible youth population that
contributes sustainably to national development.

To strengthen awareness regarding the prevention of money laundering and terrorist
financing, hundi/hawala, protection of personal banking information, digital risk
management, and potential misuse of student accounts.

Eligible Student Beneficiaries:



Students (Under 18 Years of Age):

Students in this age group will be able to acquire basic knowledge of proper use of
money, savings, and financial planning. With the consent of a parent or legal guardian,
such students may open accounts under simplified terms and conditions.

Students (Aged 18-25 Years):

Students at the university or higher education level will operate accounts independently
(without requiring guardian consent). Along with accessing savings and transaction
services, they will be benefited from suitable banking facilities, which will support their
financial preparedness for higher education or entry into professional life.

03. General Guidelines on Student Banking:

SL. Category School/College-going Student | Youth Student (Aged 18 - 25
(Under 18 Years of Age) Years)
a__| Name of Account: Student Banking Account.
b_ | Account Opening: With the assistance of a parent or | Self.

Any student under the age | legal guardian.
of 25 years from any
educational institution, can
open a bank account with
an initial deposit of only
BDT 100.

--- Page 6 ---
Account Operation:

The student will be able to
operate the account with the
assistance of his/her parent or
legal guardian.

The account will be operated
independently by the student (the
account operator or signatory shall
be determined in accordance with
the prevailing laws of the country).

Account Opening Form:
For opening a Student
Banking account, the
relevant laws, regulations,
and policies issued by the
Bangladesh Bank along
with other competent
authorities from time to
time shall be applicable in
the use of the prescribed
Uniform Account Opening
Form and KYC (Know
Your Customer) form.

Both the student and the guardian
are required to complete personal
identification forms, each duly
signed by the legal guardian.

As per the prevailing laws and
associated rules and regulations.

Required Documents for
Account Opening:

At the time of opening the
account, the bank must
verify the proper
identification of both the
account holder and the
account operator. Students
are required to submit the
following documents as
proof of identity: birth
registration certificate /
national identity card and
an identification card or a
testimonial issued by the
educational institution/ a
copy of the most recent
tuition fee receipt.
Besides these, banks may
obtain other documents as
deemed necessary. All
submitted documents must
be securely retained by the
bank as per regulatory
requirements.

A photocopy of the national
identity card of the parent or legal
guardian, or any other photo
bearing document as proof of
their identity (such as citizenship
certificate/attestation letter,
passport copy, driving license
copy etc.) must be accepted.
Besides these, the bank will take
necessary measures to keep the
guardians informed about all
transactions 10906 by _ their
dependent and the purpose of
such transactions.

New Accounts:
As per prevailing laws.

Existing Accounts:
When the account holder attains
the age of 18 years, they must
complete full ©KYC/e-KYC.
Transaction Profile (TP) and other
declaration form must be collected.

Nature of Transactions:

|For such accounts, ATM card
(debit card, TakaPay card) may
be issued; however, no cheque
book shall be issued.
The monthly withdrawal 11101

Against such accounts, cheque
books, debit card, credit card,
other cards, and international cards
(if applicable) may be issued.
Withdrawal limits through cheque

--- Page 7 ---
through the ATM card, POS and
online channels shall be a
maximum of BDT 15,000 (Taka
Fifteen Thousands only).
However, upon the guardian’s
request, this limit may be
increased up to a maximum of
BDT 25,000 (Taka Twenty Five
Thousand only). The maximum
monthly deposit amount shall be
BDT 25,000 (Taka Twenty Five
Thousand only), and the account
balance shall not exceed BDT
300,000 (Taka Three Lac only) at
any time.

Upon maturity of Deposit Pension
Scheme (DPS) associated with
the student banking account (if
any), the entire amount may be
withdrawn upon the guardian’s
request.

The bank must carefully monitor
suspicious transactions with due
diligence.

books, cards, POS and online
channels shall be determined
according to the bank’s prevailing

rules 870 regulation. The
transaction limit shall ০০
determined 95 per student’s

KYC/TP.

SMS Transaction Alert:

The account holder’s guardian
must have a mobile alert system
in place (an SMS with transaction
details will be sent immediately
to the guardian’s mobile number
upon any transaction).
For various online transactions,
One-Time Password (OTP) will
be sent to the guardian’s mobile
number.

The account holder will receive
transaction alerts via SMS on their
mobile phone.
For various online transactions,
One-Time Password (OTP) will be
sent to the account holder’s mobile
phone.

Service Charges/Fees:

No other service charges or fees,
other than government fees, shall
be deducted for SMS transaction
alerts, issuance or renewal of
ATM cards (debit cards, TakaPay
cards), Mobile Banking, Internet
Banking etc.

Except for government fees, a 50%
discount facility 9111] ৮০
applicable on the fees for SMS
transaction alerts, cheque books,
mobile banking, internet banking
activation, and issuance and
renewal of
ATM/Debit/Credit/International

cards ete. It will also be applicable

on the fees mentioned in the
schedule of charges.
Nominee: Parents or legal guardian. Similar to a_ regular savings

account ( Nominee will be selected
in accordance with prevailing laws
of the country).

--- Page 8 ---
04. Nature of Account:

(a) A student shall be permitted to maintain only one Student Account (structured as a
savings account). In case of a change in educational institution or for other valid reasons,
the existing account must be formally closed prior to the opening of a new Student
Account. The account holder shall be allowed to open a Deposit Pension Scheme (DPS)
account through fund transfer from the Student Account.

(b) Upon the account holder attaining the age of 25 years, the Student Account shall, subject
to the consent of the account holder, be converted into a regular savings account and will
remain active as such. In this regard, the relevant laws as well as rules, regulations and
policies issued by Bangladesh Bank from time to time, shall be applicable accordingly. It
is important to note that during the conversion to a regular savings account, full KYC
(Know Your Customer) procedures must be completed, and other necessary declaration
forms including TP must be obtained. After the account holder attains the age of 25
years, no cash withdrawal or fund transfer (except for account closure) can be made from
such accounts until they are converted into regular savings account and after conversion,
normal savings account charges will be applicable.

(c) If the account holder is no longer continuing their studies or wishes to close the student
account for personal reasons, they may close the account.

(d) In the event of the account holder’s death, the prevailing rules, regulations, and policies
issued from time to time regarding the determination of beneficiaries shall be applicable.

05. Citizenship:
Account holder students must be citizens of Bangladesh.

06. Source of Funds of the Account Holder:

The concerned banks must be sure about the legal validity of the source of funds deposited in the
account as per the rules and regulations issued by Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit
(BFIU) and Bangladesh Bank from time to time and the transactions made must be reasonable in
that context. In line with CTR/STR reporting, any transaction inconsistent with the Transaction
Profile Declaration of the student account, or any transaction whose purpose is unknown, the
concerned bank must make a preliminary inquiry into the matter and inform the BFIU
accordingly.

07. Highest Interest/Profit:
The highest interest/profit rate offered among the bank’s existing various types of savings
accounts will be applicable to student banking accounts.

--- Page 9 ---
08. Disbursement of Scholarships/Stipends and Collection of Tuition/Fees through Student
Banking Accounts:




Through these accounts, banks may collect monthly tuition and other fees of students on
behalf of educational institutions (through written agreements with educational
institutions)

To ensure that students from all educational institutions are brought under banking
services, banks shall encourage educational institutions to engage in student banking
initiatives. In coordination with the concerned _ scholarship-providing
authorities/educational institutions, banks shall take initiatives to develop and implement
appropriate mechanisms to collect and deposit government/private/board-based or any
other scholarships/stipends into students’ designated student banking accounts.

To facilitate the collection of tuition fees and other related fees/charges, banks shall
introduce digital services such as online banking, mobile apps or addition of necessary
feature to existing apps for both students and educational institutions.

09. Online Banking: Under the scope of online banking services, one or more of the following
methods shall be available:






Transactions at Any Bank/Branch: Arrangements can be made to allow the payment of
tuition fees and all other charges at any branch of the bank or other banks where the
educational institution's account is maintained.

Internet Banking: Students/guardians can pay tuition fees and all other fees/ charges
directly to the educational institution’s designated bank account via the internet, without
having to visit the bank, ATM, or merchant in person.

Payment Gateway: Arrangements can be made to facilitate the payment of tuition fees
and other educational fees/ charges through a payment gateway or gateway network.

Use of Digital Apps: Arrangements can be made to enable students/guardians to pay
tuition fees and other applicable educational charges from the student's account to the
educational institution’s designated account using digital applications (such as mobile
banking apps). In this case, all relevant guidelines issued by Bangladesh Bank from time
to time , including the Guidelines on Mobile Financial Services for the Banks, must be
strictly followed.

Card-Based Payment Systems: Arrangements can be made to allow the payment of all
types of applicable fees/ charges including tuition fees through debit cards issued by
banks. Such transactions can be carried out through ATMs/ CRMs (Cash Recycler
Machines)/ merchant terminal / POS (Point of Sale) machines.

Cashless Transactions: Initiatives can be made to promote cashless transactions in
educational institutions (for example-through the use of QR codes and NFC Payments).
Standing Instructions: Arrangements can be made to debit a student banking account
and credit the educational institution’s bank account accordingly, through standing
instructions set up at the bank.

10. Facilities for International Transactions for Young (18-25 Years Old) Students:


Students who hold outbound (foreign-going) student banking accounts will be given
priority in opening a student file, in compliance with the relevant rules and regulations of
Bangladesh Bank and the Government.

--- Page 10 ---
০) Students may use their accounts for international transactions and to receive income
earned in foreign currency through legal channels (such as freelancing) subject to full
compliance with all relevant rules and regulations issued by Bangladesh Bank and other
competent authorities.

11. Operation of Student Banking Services with at Least One Educational Institution per
Bank Branch/Sub-Branch: All banks shall select at least one educational institution
(kindergarten/school/college/madrasa/technical and vocational institution/university etc. in both
Bengali and English medium) at the district/upazila/union level and shall conduct student
banking activities through the nearest branch or sub-branch of the bank. This arrangement shall
enable students to directly access all types of banking services from the concerned bank branch
or sub-branch. In respect of educational institutions that are not yet affiliated with any bank
branch or sub-branch, banks shall take necessary initiatives to bring such institutions under
coverage expeditiously. To avoid duplication in the selection of educational institutions, banks
shall coordinate among themselves and take decisions accordingly.

12. Enhancement of Financial Literacy among Students: Activities should be taken to
enhance financial literacy of the students following the implementation strategy of the Financial
Literacy Guidelines.

13. Provision of Student Banking Services through Booths/ Mobile Counters/ Sub-
Branches/ Agent Outlets: Banks shall, following proper procedures and guidelines, coordinate
with educational institutions to set up temporary booths on one or more designated days each
month within the institution premises or nearby locations. Additionally, banks shall take
initiatives to facilitate student banking services through mobile booths/counters, sub-
branches/agent outlets etc. to ensure easier access for students.

14. Priority for Marginalized Communities, Small Ethnic Groups, Female Students, and
Secondary-Level Students: Student banking services shall be ensured in both urban and rural
areas and steps should be taken to provide these facilities to marginalized communities, small
ethnic groups, and female students on a priority basis and to develop appropriate financial
products for them. In addition, banks shall take effective initiatives to open student banking
accounts for all students of secondary level as well as children of BDT 10/50/100 account
holders/ no-frills accounts.

15. Incentive Measures: To build students’ trust in the banking system and encourage their
participation, banks may undertake the following measures:

a) Develop age-appropriate materials and campaigns for students and conduct interactive
workshops to provide ideas about savings.

b) Offer bonuses for savings accounts, bonus points, gift vouchers, and educational
materials for consistent saving.

c) Organize essay competitions, quiz competitions, and Olympiads/championships to
increase interest in financial services.

--- Page 11 ---
Provide financial education (e.g., balance checking, expense tracking) through digital
tools/ educational resources (such as educational apps, video tutorials, and websites), and
entertainment (gamified learning/apps).

To promote student banking, relevant educational institutions, progressive teachers, and
the administrative committee of the institutions shall be encouraged through the provision
of awards based on the opening and effective operation of student banking accounts for
the highest percentage of students.

Facilitate group-based learning activities at bank branches through mutual collaboration
between educational institutions and banks to enhance practical knowledge of banking
and financial matters among students.

Taking initiatives to organize at least two customer awareness programs per year in
selected educational institutions with the aim of increasing customer awareness regarding
‘Student Banking Accounts’.

Banks should take initiatives to increase customer awareness by sending SMS
notifications at least twice a year regarding the benefits and required documents for
opening a ‘Student Banking Account’.

To take initiatives for providing awards/scholarships from the CSR fund to meritorious
and underprivileged student banking account holders.

Organize various programs involving local community through various thematic
activities and create bilingual or regional language content for students of different ethnic
groups.

To enhance awareness on preventing money laundering and terrorist financing, avoiding
hundi/hawala and online gambling, maintaining confidentiality of personal banking
information, managing digital risks, and preventing potential misuse of accounts.

16. Education Insurance: The concerned banks may provide education insurance facilities to
the accounts operated under their student banking activities, so that assistance can be extended
under this insurance coverage if any student faces financial hardship in continuing their
education.

17. Human Resource Development and Employment Generation: Along with promoting
financial inclusion through student banking activities, the following measures aim to support
human resource development and create employment opportunities:




Banks may provide loan facilities under the relevant Bangladesh Bank schemes, based on
20810181751 payment guarantees, for underprivileged and disadvantaged student banking
account holders (including dropouts) to participate in vocational/technical/information
technology, and other training programs.

After reaching the age of 18 years, student banking account holders may receive loans
under the relevant scheme to support income-generating activities and the operation of
skill-based profession and businesses acquired through training.

Banks may also provide loans under the relevant scheme, based on guardians’ payment
guarantees, to student banking account holders for purchasing necessary educational
materials for higher education.

--- Page 12 ---
18. Regarding the Operation of Student Banking Activities: As per the directives of
Bangladesh Bank, all banks shall organize activities related to student banking (such as
conferences, campaigns, seminars, workshops, symposiums, fairs, training, and review meetings)
at the national, divisional, and regional levels.

19. Reporting and Monitoring:

20.




Annual Reporting: Banks shall submit the action plan for achieving their self-
determined targets, in the prescribed format (Annex-ka), by the third week of December
of each year, and the report on student banking accounts and product usage, in the
prescribed format (Annex-kha), by the third week of January of the following year, to the
Director, Financial Inclusion Department, Bangladesh Bank.

Quarterly Reporting: Banks shall submit their quarterly progress reports on student
banking activities to the Financial Inclusion Department of Bangladesh Bank in the
prescribed formats (Annex—ga)

Bangladesh Bank reserves the right to inspect any student banking related activities at
any time and place as deemed necessary.

Banks shall publish updates regarding their student banking activities in their annual
reports and on their websites.

Others:



The relevant laws, rules, regulations, and policies issued by Bangladesh Bank along with
other competent authorities shall be applicable to student banking accounts as well.
Bangladesh Bank reserves the right to amend, modify, add to, or repeal any provision of
these Guidelines at any time, as deemed necessary.

These guidelines shall also be applicable to previously opened school banking accounts.
In the event of any conflict, inconsistency, or ambiguity between the Bengali version and
the English version, the Bengali version shall prevail.