--- Page 1 ---
Project Implementation Unit
COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response Facility Project
(AIIB Loan No. L0415A)
SME & Special Programmes Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd


SMESPD Circular Letter No. 09




Date: 20 September, 2023



Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All the Participating Banks and Financial Institutions of CECRFP


Revised Operations Manual for refinancing under ‘COVID-19 Emergency
and Crisis Response Facility Project (CECRFP)’

Aligning with the stimulus package for CMSMEs announced by the Government of
Bangladesh in 2020 (amounting to BDT 200 billion), Bangladesh Bank is providing refinance
facilities to the participating banks and financial institutions under “COVID-19 Emergency and
Crisis Response Facility Project (CECRFP)” funded by Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
(AIIB).
2. The refinance facility was operating as per Operations Manual (OM) attached with
SMESPD Circular No. 06, dated 23 June, 2021. Based on the present scenario, the Operations
Manual has been revised with the concurrence of AIIB and the approval of the Project Steering
Committee. The revised OM is attached herewith for information and necessary action of all
concern. The existing OM will be replaced by the revised OM.

Yours Sincerely,



Attachment: As mentioned.

(Md. Abdul Wahab)

Director (CECRFP)
Project Director
Phone: 88-02-9530010

--- Page 2 ---
OPERATIONS MANUAL
FOR
REFINANCING TO CMSMEs UNDER


COVID-19 EMERGENCY AND CRISIS RESPONSE
FACILITY PROJECT
AIIB Loan No. L0415A

(Revised on June 30, 2023)


















PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION UNIT (PIU)
SME AND SPECIAL PROGRAMMES DEPARTMENT
BANGLADESH BANK

--- Page 3 ---
ii


Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................ 1
Project Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 2
Terms and Conditions ........................................................................................................................................ 8
Participating Financial Institution (PFI) ........................................................................................................ 10
Sub-loan / Sub-borrower .................................................................................................................................. 12
Refinancing Loan .............................................................................................................................................. 16
Debt Servicing, Rescheduling and Event of Default ...................................................................................... 19
Environmental and Social ................................................................................................................................ 20
Procurement ...................................................................................................................................................... 23
10. Fund Management………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..24
11. Monitoring …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..29
12. Reporting ........................................................................................................................................................... 34
13. Promotion of the Project .................................................................................................................................. 35
Annex 1: Requirement for Modification of Policy Guidelines .................................................................................. 367
Annex 2: Refinance Scheme Process Flow Diagram................................................................................................... 38
Annex 3: Brief Terms and Conditions of Sub-loan and Refinancing Loan ................................................................. 40
Annex 4: Participation Agreement between BB and PFI ............................................................................................ 41
Annex 5: Eligibility Criteria for PFIs .......................................................................................................................... 48
Annex 6: Eligibility Criteria for Sub-loans and Sub-borrowers .................................................................................. 49
Annex 7: Form Ka - Refinance Loan Application Form ............................................................................................. 53
Annex 8: Refinance Application Checklist.................................................................................................................. 55
Annex 9: Accreditation Assessment Form .................................................................................................................. 56
Annex 10: Financial Statements .................................................................................................................................. 57
Annex 11: E&S Monitoring Checklist ......................................................................................................................... 58
Annex 12. Outline of Annual Environmental and Social Monitoring Report ............................................................. 60
Annex 13. Interim Un-audited Financial Report ......................................................................................................... 62
Annex 14. Annual Financial Report ............................................................................................................................ 67
Annex 15. Statement of Expenditure Form for PFI ..................................................................................................... 71
Annex 16. Summary Report of On-going Sub-project (PIU to AIIB). …….. …….. …….. …….. …….. …. ……..72
Annex 17. Quarterly Progress Report (PIU to AIIB)… …….. …….. …….. …….. …….. …….. …….. ……..……73
Annex 18-A. Quarterly Progress Report (PFI to PIU)……… ……… …….. …….. …….. ……..………………….74
Annex 18-B. Quarterly Report on On-going Sub-project Summary (PFI to PIU)… … …….. …….. … ……..……75
Annex 19. Quarterly Monitoring Report on E&S Risk Categorization, ESDD and E&S Monitoring (PFI to PIU) . .76


37

--- Page 4 ---
iii

Abbreviations

AIIB
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
BB
Bangladesh Bank
BDT
Bangladesh Taka
CMSME
Cottage, Micro, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise
CMSEs
Cottage, Micro and Small Sized Enterprises
COVID-19
Coronavirus Disease 2019
DA
Designated Account
ESF
Environmental and Social Framework
E&S/ES
Environmental and Social
ESDD
Environmental and Social Due Diligence
ESMS
Environmental and Social Management System
ESS
Environmental and Social Standard
ESEL
Environmental and Social Exclusion List
ESP
Environmental and Social Policy
ESRM
Environmental and Social Risk Management
Etc.
Etcetera
FI
Financial Institution
FID
Financial Institutions Division, Ministry of Finance
FD
Finance Division, Ministry of Finance
GOB
Government of Bangladesh
L/A
Loan Agreement
MOC
Ministry of Commerce
MOF
Ministry of Finance
MOI
Ministry of Industries
MEs
Medium-Sized Enterprises
MSMEs
Micro, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
NBFI
Non-Bank Financial Institution
OM
Operations Manual
PD
Project Director
PFI
Participating Financial Institution
PIU
Project Implementation Unit
PSC
Project Steering Committee
P/R
Progress Report
RFA
Revolving Fund Account
RL
Refinancing Loan
SC
Steering Committee
SLA
Subsidiary Loan Agreement
SME
Small and Medium-sized Enterprise
SME
Small and Medium Enterprise Foundation
SMESPD
SME & Special Programmes Department, Bangladesh Bank
USD
United States Dollars
ii

--- Page 5 ---
60




1. Introduction
1.1.
Objective of the Project
COVID-19 has had major impact on the business operation and financial health of the Cottage,
Micro, Small and Medium Sized Enterprises (CMSMEs) in Bangladesh. CMSMEs are essential
for overall economic development of a country contributing around 20-25% of the GDP and are
an important source of economic growth and employment. Yet this group is hard hit by the
pandemic and often struggles to access bank loans. Based on this recognition, the Government of
Bangladesh (GOB) announced BDT200 billion incentive packages for the CMSME sector where
banks and non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs) are providing loans using their own fund to
CMSMEs. Necessary guidelines have been issued by Bangladesh Bank (SMESPD Circular no. 1
dated 13 April 2020 and SMESPD Circular no. 9 dated 09 September 2021).
Bangladesh Bank (BB) further formed a revolving refinance scheme amounting BDT100 billion
under SMESPD Circular-2 dated 26 April 2020 (Refinancing Scheme). The aim is to provide up
to 50% of refinancing loan to banks and NBFIs against their disbursed loans to CMSMEs
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) has agreed to provide a loan of USD 300 million to
the People‟s Republic of Bangladesh (the Borrower) under its COVID-19 Recovery Facility to
support the Refinancing Scheme to the CMSME sector (the Project). Under the Project, AIIB
will lend to the government a sovereign backed loan. The Loan Agreement (L/A) for the Project
was signed between AIIB and the GOB on February 26, 2021. The funds available under the
Project would be passed on to the Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) as refinancing loan
(RL) against eligible activities for which a Sub-loan is extended which is limited, in the case of
Medium-Sized Enterprises (MEs), to working capital (employee wages, inventory, payments on
short term debt and other day to day operating expenses) of the Sub-borrower, and, in case of
Cottage, Micro and Small Sized Enterprises (CMSEs), to working capital of the Sub-borrower
and term loan facilities (up to 3 years) for renovation and decoration of existing infrastructure
and purchases of short-to-mid-term assets; provided that in the case of both MEs and CMSEs,
such activity shall not include: (i) land acquisition; (ii) an activity which would result in a Sub-
loan to be classified as Environmental and Social (ES) Category A; (iii) an activity which would
cause a Sub-loan to be classified as ES Category B, if such activities may potentially result in (a)
Involuntary Resettlement; (b) adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples and/or vulnerable groups;
(c) significant risks to or impacts on the environment, community health and safety, biodiversity,
or cultural resources; or (d) significant occupational health and safety risks; (e) activities listed in
the Environmental and Social Exclusion List (ESEL); (f) activities listed in the exclusion list of

--- Page 6 ---
the Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM) Guidelines. The PFIs would repay the
RL to the Bangladesh Bank after one (1) year from the date of refinance.

1.2.
Purpose of Operations Manual
The Operations Manual (OM) presented here is specifically for the use of the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) and for the PFIs, OM is intended to facilitate PIU and PFIs to
thoroughly understand policies and the mechanism of the Project, to process the AIIB loan and to
realize successful implementation of the Project. Necessary amendments may be made at any
time based on the changes in economic situation or laws.
Any change in the OM, which would materially change the structure and/or nature of the
scheme, shall be made by the PIU with the approval of competent authorities as listed in Annex 1
and with concurrence of AIIB.
2. Project Introduction
2.1.
Scheme of the Project
The Project objective is to support credit expansion and reduce liquidity constraints brought on
by the COVID-19 pandemic to CMSMEs in Bangladesh. AIIB provides the loan funds in USD
to the GOB represented by its Ministry of Finance (MOF). GOB shall authorize BB and Finance
Division of the Ministry of Finance (MOF-FD) to implement the Project. The MOF-FD shall be
the Executing Agency of the Project. AIIB funds provided are exchanged to Bangladesh Taka
(BDT) for refinancing to PFIs (Refinancing Loan or RL) against eligible activity for which a
Sub-loan is extended which is limited, in the case of MEs, to working capital (employee wages,
inventory, payments on short term debt and other day to day operating expenses) of the Sub-
borrower, and, in case of CMSEs, to working capital of the Sub-borrower and term loan facilities
(up to 3 years) for renovation and decoration of existing infrastructure and purchases of short-to-
mid-term assets. In practice, BB will act as an Implementing Entity responsible for the
administration of the Project on behalf of MOF-FD and make RL to PFIs. The amount of the
Loan of USD300 million is earmarked for AIIB to the Government of Bangladesh. At least 70
percent of the loan fund must be allocated to CMSEs and no more than 30 percent to medium
enterprises. Total allocation for the manufacturing and service sectors must be at least 65 percent
and allocation for the trading sector must not be more than 35 percent. The maximum amount of
RL to State-Owned Banks should not be more than 10%.

--- Page 7 ---
2.2.
Management Structure of the Project
Figure 1. Management Structure

Steering Committee (SC)
For the smooth implementation of the Project, the Steering Committee will be established at
ministry level and makes decisions on policy issues relevant to the implementation and
management of the Project.

The Project Steering Committee (PSC) shall be comprised of:

-Senior Secretary/Secretary, Finance Division (FD), Ministry of Finance (Mof)-Chairman
-Additional Secretary (Macroeconomics), Finance Division (FD), Ministry of Finance (Mof)-
Member
-Additional Secretary (Budget-1), Finance Division (FD), Ministry of Finance (Mof)-Member
-Representative from Financial Institutions Division (FID), Ministry of Finance (Mof)-Member
- Representative from the Economic Relations Division (ERD), Ministry of Finance (Mof)-
Member
- Representative from Socio Economic Infrastructure Division, Planning Commission-Member

--- Page 8 ---
-Representative from Implementations Monitoring & Evaluation Division-Member
-Project Director, CECRFP, Bangladesh Bank-Member Secretary
The principal function of the Steering Committee is to discuss and make decisions on policy
issues relevant to the implementation and management of the Project, inter alia:
A. review, consider and approval of major policy changes of OM;
B. supervision of the Project;
C. the Eligibility Criteria and their periodical review;
D. the establishment and amendment of terms and conditions of RLs and Sub-loans;
E. the feedbacks of lessons learnt and reflection into policy formulation; and
F. any other issues related to smooth operation of the Project.
The Steering Committee will convene at least once every quarter but can be held on an ad-hoc
basis if any issue arises to be discussed immediately.
Ministry of Finance (MOF)/ the Executing Agency
The MOF-FD will play the role of Executing Agency on behalf of the GOB who bears the prime
responsibility of receiving and repaying AIIB loans from and to AIIB and supervision of the
Project. The GOB shall bear the credit risk of PFIs as well as the exchange rate risk.
Bangladesh Bank (BB)/ the Implementing Entity
Bangladesh Bank, in particular its SME & Special Programmes Department (SMESPD), will act
as an Implementing Entity responsible for the administration of the Project with aim to achieve
the project objective under the Subsidiary Loan Agreement (SLA) concluded between MOF-FD
and BB prior to the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement.
Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established at SME and Special Programmes
Department (SMESPD) of BB. It will be headed by a full-time General Manager (Project
Director) nominated by BB‟s Governor, a Deputy General Manager (Deputy Project Director),
full-time other key persons and the adequate number of support staff members who will
specifically handle all relevant tasks related to the Project. BB may assign appropriate level staff
members in the PIU as they think fit. The structure of PIU is shown in the figure below.

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2: Organogram of Project Implementation Unit

Source: Bangladesh Bank
The functions of the PIU will be performed by each section as shown below:
Project Director
 The Project Director (PD) will be primarily responsible for the Project implementation
with the cooperation of Finance Division and Economic Relations Division (ERD) and,
shall mobilize any directorate of BB necessary for the smooth implementation of the
Project through appropriate authority of BB.
 The PD will be the approval authority for all RLs under the Project. PD will also be the
approval authority for payment of all expenses. PD may refer cases to the Governor of
BB by his/her own judgment during the approval process.
Refinance & Fund Management Section
 due maintenance of the Designated Account, the Project Operating Account and the
Revolving Fund Account established for the Project, and disbursements of RL funds to

--- Page 10 ---
PFIs, including instruction to the Accounts and Budgeting Department for transfer of
funds from/ to such Project Accounts,
 instruction to the Accounts and Budgeting Department to transfer funds to be paid by PFI
to Revolving Fund Account, BB‟s Revenue Account and MOF‟s Revenue Account
 prepare disbursement projections, withdrawal application and request for initial
disbursement and replenishment to AIIB in accordance with AIIB‟s requirements,
 preparation of statements of the Project Accounts,
 receive, review and approval of Refinancing Loan Applications from PFIs,
 cooperation to external audit of the Designated Account, the Project Operating Account
and the Revolving Fund Account as well as to the external audit for Statement of
Expenditures.
Monitoring and Administration Section
 coordination with BB‟s other departments for general affairs,
 provision of necessary administrative assistance for other sections of PIU,
 conducting the accreditation of PFIs, including annual review, against the eligibility
criteria stated in the Project Agreement and the Operations Manual,
 concluding a Participation Agreement with PFIs,
 oversee RLs and Sub-loans,
 daily monitoring of the Project,
 production of Quarterly Progress Reports (P/R), including On-going Sub-loan Summary
Report, and Project Completion Report (PCR),
 preparation of Current Repayment and Overdue Status Report,
 ensuring that PFIs, and, through PFIs, that Sub-borrowers, adhere to the AIIB‟s
applicable fiduciary and environmental and social requirements and the Borrower‟s laws
and regulations applicable to RLs and Sub-loans,
 carrying out project monitoring and evaluation in accordance with the Project Agreement
and the OM, including monitoring the utilization and repayments of RLs and PFIs‟
compliance with the terms of the Participation Agreements,
 ensure a team shall be formed within the PIU including staff from the Project
Implementation Entity‟s Sustainable Finance Department to implement the ESRM
Guidelines for the Project,
 ensuring that the ESRM Guidelines comply with the Borrower‟s laws and regulations, the
AIIB‟s ESF and the ESS,
 ensuring that each ESMS complies with the Borrower‟s laws and regulations and the
ESRM Guidelines,
 implementing the ESRM Guidelines,
 ensuring that all reports are provided to the Bank on time and to specification.
2.3.
Governing Agreements for the Project

--- Page 11 ---
The Project will be implemented based on the following agreements:
A. Loan Agreement (L/A) between AIIB and GOB
which stipulates obligations of the Borrower, inter alia:
1) Loan Amount and Allocation of Proceeds of Loan,
2) Disbursement Procedure,
3) Administration Structure, and
4) Reporting Requirements to AIIB.
B. Project Agreement (PR/A) on the Project between AIIB and Bangladesh Bank (BB)
which stipulates various issues on the implementation of the Project, inter alia:
1) Implementation arrangements, and
2) Project monitoring, reporting and evaluation
The major contents of PR/A have been incorporated in the OM, however, it is
recommended to refer to these documents from time to time to obtain deeper
understanding of the scheme of the Project, including the background.
C. Subsidiary Loan Agreement (SLA) between GOB and BB
1) The Subsidiary Loan Agreement officially authorizes BB as the Implementing Entity
which has been fully effective since when the L/A is declared effective and will be
valid until 29 February, 2024 or such other date as may be agreed between the
Government of Bangladesh and BB.
D. Participation Agreement (P/A) between BB and PFI
1) Each accredited PFI will conclude a comprehensive Participation Agreement with
BB, which is a basic agreement to be applied to all the RLs. The form of the
Participation Agreement is shown as Annex 4. The Participation Agreement
provides for what is required to PFI under the Project, inter alia:
 Terms and Conditions of the RLs and PFIs;
 Procedures for RL and its Repayment; and
 Monitoring and Reporting to PIU.
2) The Participation Agreement shall also include, but not limited to, the following
obligations of PFI:
 To comply with all the rules and regulations applicable to banks and financial
institutions in Bangladesh;
 To comply with the eligibility criteria at all times unless the PFI is at the remedial
stage and is so allowed by BB;

--- Page 12 ---
 To comply with all the terms and conditions of sub-loans as well as in this OM;
 To conduct its operations and affairs, with due diligence and efficiency and in
accordance with sound administrative, financial, economic and managerial
standards;
Detailed terms and conditions of PFIs are outlined in Annex 4.
E. A Sub-loan Agreement (S/A) shall be signed between a PFI and a Sub-borrower that
stipulates the Terms and Conditions of the sub-loan. All the terms and conditions as per
BB circulars, PFI agreement and PFI‟s credit policy pertaining the sub-borrower-will be
included in this Sub-loan Agreement.
3. Terms and Conditions
3.1.
Terms and Conditions of Sub-loan
The PFI shall assume all credit risks associated with extending of Sub-loans under the Project.
The Sub-loan is the term used to express the loan to be provided by the PFI to the Sub-borrower
which includes the credit funded by the refinancing fund from PIU. Sub-loans should be made in
accordance with all instructions set out in SMESPD Circular No.01; dated April 13th, 2020,
SMESPD Circular No.02; dated April 26th, 2020 or as amended from time to time and other
relevant circulars/circular letters/policies of BB and this OM.
CMSMEs in different sectors and of different natures (such as gender) will be equally treated
with regard to the terms and conditions of loans so far as they satisfy pre-set eligibility criteria.
The basic terms and conditions of the Sub-loan scheme under the Project are outlined in Annex
3.The Sub-loan Agreement shall also include, but not limited to, the following obligations of the
Sub-borrower:
A. use the proceeds of sub-loans for the eligible activity for which a Sub-loan is extended
which is limited, in the case of MEs, to working capital (employee wages, inventory,
payments on short term debt and other day to day operating expenses) of the Sub-
borrower, and, in case of CMSEs, to working capital of the Sub-borrower and term loan
facilities (up to 3 years) for renovation and decoration of existing infrastructure and
purchases of short-to-mid-term assets;
B. carry out the activity being financed with due diligence and efficiency and following
sound technical, economic, financial, managerial, fiduciary, integrity and environmental
and social standards and practices;
C. not engage in any Prohibited Practice in relation to the sub-loan or other activity being
financed, or authorize or permit anyone to do so on its behalf;

--- Page 13 ---
D. notify the PFI of any violation of AIIB‟s Policy on Prohibited Practices1 or if any
international financial institution imposes any sanction on the sub-borrower;
E. manage its operations and carry out the activity being financed following the Guideline
on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Banks and Financial
Institutions in Bangladesh by BB.
More detailed provisions as required in the Sub-loan Agreement are outlined in Annex 6.
3.2.
Terms and Conditions of RL
Basis terms and conditions of the RL are outlined in Annex 3.The principal and interest
payments of RL shall be made in accordance with the schedule of amortization of each loan as
prepared by PIU. These payments of interests and repayments of principal shall be realized by
debiting them against the current account of the concerned PFI maintained with BB. Then,
principals of RL shall be credited to Revolving Fund Account (RFA), and one-fourth(1/4) of
interests on RL to Revenue Account of BB and three-fourth(3/4) to Revenue Account of MOF,
respectively.
In such cases, no overdue of interest and principal payment is expected. However, the PFI may
request BB, in advance, to make delay in debiting the PFI‟s account on valid ground like
liquidity problem etc. In such cases, PFI should pay a penalty of 2% above the prevailing rate on
the outstanding amount for the overdue period and to recover the full amount including
interest/profit/penalty at one instance.
Interest on RLs shall be calculated on accrual basis of the number of days actually elapsed.
Detailed terms and conditions of the RL are outlined in the Participation Agreement in Annex 4.
3.3.
Revision of Terms and Conditions
Any change in the terms and conditions of the RLs as well as the Sub-loan specified above,
which would materially change the structure and/or nature of the scheme, shall be approved by
the Steering Committee and AIIB. Such revision shall, in principle, be applied to uncommitted
loans only. The application of such revision to an outstanding or committed loan shall be subject
to an agreement between the related parties.
3.4.
Financing Method
The Refinancing Method will be used for the disbursement of RLs. Under the Refinancing
Method, the PFI makes disbursement of the Sub-loan prior to submitting its Request for
Refinancing to PIU. The RLs can be extended only for Sub-loans that have been disbursed one

1Policy on Prohibited Practices - Operational Policies & Directives - AIIB

--- Page 14 ---
10

(1) month prior to PFI‟s request of the respective refinancing. However, PIU may consider this
time limit for any valid reason.
4. Participating Financial Institution (PFI)
4.1.
Accreditation Criteria of PFIs
Please refer to Annex 5 for the eligibility criteria of PFIs.
4.2.
Revision of Eligibility Criteria
Any change in the eligibility criteria used under the Project shall be first reviewed and approved
by the Steering Committee and then reviewed and concurred by AIIB.
4.3.
Accreditation of PFI
Accreditation Procedure
PIU shall invite applications from banks and financial institutions, examine their eligibility vis-à-
vis the accreditation criteria, list up eligible PFI candidates, approve the final list of eligible PFIs,
and report it to the Steering Committee.
In order for the above process, PIU shall establish the accreditation procedure which includes the
following:
A. Application from banks and financial institutions
B. Due diligence of banks and financial institutions by PIU, and
C. Monitoring and review of PFI compliance with accreditation criteria
Application by Banks and Financial Institutions
In order to facilitate PIU to follow the accreditation procedure stated below, the Application by
banks and financial institutions must include following information and data, inter alia:
A. Copy of License for banking or financing;
B. Audited financial statements for latest three (3) full years, together with the latest Annual
Report, which show profitable operation in latest two (2) consecutive years;
C. Copy of Lending Policies, which show commitment to SME lending; and
D. Copy of Risk Assessment Procedures.
The other information and data such as Capital Adequacy Ratio, Non-Performing Loans (NPL)
Ratio, CAMELS Rating, and Compliance with Prudential Regulations shall be obtained from
other Departments of BB.

--- Page 15 ---
11

Due Diligence of Banks and Financial Institutions by PIU
Selection will be made on the basis of the financial information consisting of the information
provided in the Application by banks and financial institutions and CAMELS data. The PIU will
examine the information and data on an item by item base to each bank whether the information
and data would satisfy the level of each item or not. The examination of each item and aggregate
assessment shall be performed in accordance with the Accreditation Assessment Form and its
attachment form to summarize the financial statements attached herewith as Annex 9 and Annex
10, respectively.
Those applicant banks evaluated as unsatisfactory level in any one of the criteria will
automatically lose eligibility for PFI. The PIU may further discuss on unfavorable or adverse
information of the applicant, if any, and make decision on whether the applicant be excluded
from PFIs or not. The PIU is authorized to accredit PFIs among those which have been qualified
in the assessment. The final decision of the PIU will be informed to the applicant together with
the evaluation made and report to Steering Committee.
If additional banks or financial institutions appear to be included in PFIs during the
implementation of the Project, the whole procedures stated above should be exercised for
decision-making.
PFI Review by AIIB
PIU will submit the list of all newly accredited PFIs to AIIB within 5 days of the end of month in
which PFI is accredited. If AIIB believes that the PFIs is not fit to be accredited for any reason,
AIIB will inform PIU. PIU will immediately remove the PFIs from the list of accredited PFIs
and inform the PFI.
AIIB reserves the right to disallow disbursements from the Loan Facility to any PFI determined
not to be complying with any of the above criteria unless and until the PFI can satisfy the
criteria.
Monitoring and Annual Review of PFI Compliance with Accreditation Criteria
As part of its monitoring activities, PIU shall request PFIs to submit each PFI‟s audited financial
statements and the financial data required for assessing the PFI, immediately after the completion
of auditing every year. Based on the collected financial data plus in-house information and data,
PIU shall review the accredited PFIs in accordance with the accreditation criteria described in
Section 4.1. The results of accreditation assessment shall be authorized by the Project Director of
PIU and reported to the Steering Committee.

--- Page 16 ---
12

4.4.
Entry of Exit of PFIs
At the time of annual review of PFIs, applications for new entry and/or exit shall be considered.
Any change in the list of accredited PFIs at the time of annual review shall be approved by PIU
subject to AIIB‟s review and concurrence and be reported to the Steering Committee.
4.5.
Loss of Eligibility
Irrespective of the timing, whether at the time of review or else, PFIs that are found to be failing
to meet the eligibility criteria will be required to submit remedial plans for examination by PIU.
If the submitted plans are deemed sufficient to endorse that the non-compliance is likely to be
solved within a reasonable time limit, PIU may agree to allow those banks and financial
institutions to maintain the PFI status conditioning the time limit. Otherwise, the PIU shall take
actions to stop disbursing new RL until the PFI becomes fully eligible again.
5. Sub-loan / Sub-borrower
5.1.
Pre-conditions for Sub-loan
The Project is made possible with the funds to be provided by AIIB and with the administering
and intermediary role played by PIU, it is imperative to have it clearly understood and accepted
by the Sub-borrower that PIU and AIIB may intervene the credit appraisal, implementation,
administration, monitoring as well as review of the Sub-loan. The PFI shall have the Sub-
borrower agree the pre-conditions of the Project as have been stated earlier in Section 3.1.
5.2.
Eligibility Criteria
Eligible Sub-borrower and Sub-loans
Please refer to Annex 6 for the eligibility criteria for Sub-loans and Sub-borrowers.
Revision of Eligibility Criteria
Any change in the eligibility criteria used under the Project shall be first reviewed and approved
by the Steering Committee and then reviewed and concurred by AIIB
5.3.
Approval of Sub-loan by PFI
Application for Sub-loan to be prepared by the Sub-borrower
The PFI shall have the Sub-borrower prepare an application for the Sub-loan prior to proceeding
to the credit appraisal process of the bank. The PFI shall use its own format for Application of
Sub-loan. In preparing the formalities required for the Project, the PFI is guided by BB‟s Small
and Medium Enterprise Credit Policies and Programmes in which it is stipulated that each

--- Page 17 ---
13

bank/financial institution shall follow a separate business strategy in financing SME loan with
least formalities in executing documentation to ensure easy and speedy loan sanction and
disbursement process. Any part of the information that is required under the Project but is not
required under the prevailing commercial practice must be provided additionally by the Sub-
borrower to PFI. The application shall contain, among others, the information required for the
credit appraisal and for examining the compliance of the Sub-loan with the eligibility criteria of
the Project.
Upon receipt of the Application from the Sub-borrower, the PFI assigns its own number to each
of the Sub-loan which is distinct and self-indicative as the Sub-loan under the Project. The PFI
conducts credit appraisal and verification of the compliance, based on the Application submitted
by the Sub-borrower and uses the information submitted for transcription into Form Ka,
Application for Refinancing Loan and Form Kha, Request for Disbursement of Refinancing
Loan (Annex 7) for submission and application to PIU for the disbursement of RL.
Credit Appraisal of Sub-loan by PFI
The PFI conducts credit appraisal and verification of the compliance with the banking and non-
bank financial institutions regulations and with the eligibility requirement established for the
Project. The credit appraisal and verification of the compliance with the banking regulations
shall be conducted based on the policy and procedural rules established by the PFI whereas the
verification of the compliance with the eligibility requirement for the Project shall be conducted
based on the Operations Manual that demonstrate the relevant terms and conditions to be
satisfied by the Sub-loan/Sub-borrower.
Credit Appraisal and Verification of Compliance with the Regulations
The approval process may vary among the PFIs. The typical procedures to be followed for the
credit appraisal and verification of compliance with the banking regulation, however, appear to
be as follows
 The Sub-borrower fills up the Application for Sub-loan with accurate and sufficient
information;
 The Sub-borrower shall provide CIB undertakings, the financial statements, other
information, papers and documents required by the relationship officer in charge at the
branch office;
 The relationship officer in charge at the branch shall evaluate the Sub-borrower‟s
Application with due diligence, accomplish the relevant tasks and prepares the Credit
Assessment Report;
 The Credit Assessment Report shall be forwarded to zonal office or to head office for
review by the Zonal Credit Risk Officer (ZCRO) or Head Office Credit Risk Officer
(HCRO);

--- Page 18 ---
14

 ZCRO or HCRO informs the results of review to the branch office;
 ZCRO/HCRO supports the Credit Assessment and forward the recommendation for
approval to Head of Business Unit (HOBU) and to Head of Credit Risk (HOCR) for
onward recommendation;
 HOCR informs the result of review to ZCRO;
 HOCR and HOBU supports the Credit Assessment Report and forward the
recommendation for approval to Credit Committee;
 Credit Committee informs the decision as per the delegated authority to HOCR and
HOBU;
 Credit Committee forwards the Credit Assessment Report to Executive Committee/Board
for approval within their respective authority; and
 Executive Committee/Board informs the decision to HOCR and HOBU.
Verification of the Compliance with the Eligibility Requirement of the Project
The verification of the compliance with the eligibility requirement shall be the task that is unique
to the Project. The following procedures shall be adopted by the PFI to ensure the accuracy and
correctness of the information provided on the Sub-borrower and the Sub-loan submitted to PIU
A. In filling the Application for Sub-loan, the Sub-borrower shall provide information
required under the Project in addition to what are presented in the procedure described
above for credit appraisal;
B. The relationship officer in charge at the branch shall evaluate the Sub-borrower‟s
Application and the information provided with due diligence, accomplish the relevant
tasks and prepares the Eligibility Assessment Report which the PFI should develop
according to its own rules and practices; and
C. The Eligibility Assessment Report thus created by the relationship officer shall
accompany the Credit Assessment Report through the layers of authority for final
approval.
Compliance with the Eligibility Requirement and the Operations Manual
The PFI checks and verifies the contents of the Application for Sub-loan under the Project
submitted by the Sub-borrower against the eligibility requirement and the Operations Manual.
The result of the verification shall be reflected into the preparation of Form No. A-1, Application
for Refinancing Loan. The PFI can reflect the compliance of the Sub-loan by entering the check
marks into entry boxes for compliance in the Form No. A-1, Application for Refinancing Loan.
The PFI is recommended to prepare a checklist based on which the Eligibility Assessment
Report should be created for verifying the Sub-loan‟s compliance with the Eligibility
Requirement and the Operations Manual and to accompany the Credit Assessment Report to be
submitted for credit approval to the competent officer of the institution.

--- Page 19 ---
15

Compliance with the Banking Regulations
In conducting the credit appraisal and approval of the Application, the PFI ensures that the Sub-
loan examined is in compliance with the prevailing banking rules and regulations imposed by the
Government and/or the regulatory authority concerned. In addition, the PFI under the scheduled
banks has to comply with the Prudential Regulation for Banks of BB for all of their Sub-loans
under the Project. The PFI under NBFI license similarly has to comply with the Prudential
Regulation for NBFI. The procedures of the PFI established for appraising the normal credits can
be adopted for the purpose of the compliance with the Banking Regulations.
Collateral
A special attention is invited to the issue of collateral conditions for the Sub-loan. Under the
Project, the requirement of collateral for the Sub-loan rests upon the determination to be made by
the PFI in accordance with the PFI‟s own policy and guidelines and in compliance with the rules
and regulations prevailing in Bangladesh. For consideration of the collateral issue, reference can
be made to the SME Credit Policy of BB. The BB‟s policy articulates the practical approach for
dealing with the collateral requirement for SME lending. It is to be noted that the prevailing
regulation allows the PFI under the scheduled banks to render the collateral free loans up to Tk
1.0 million to small enterprises in general and to Tk 2.5 million for women entrepreneurs. The
BB‟s Policy further gives the examples of tools complementing the collateral required in such
means as; personal guarantee, group guarantee, social guarantee, hypothecation of products and
machineries, group security, social security, etc.
Credit Approval Process
The approval process must reinforce the segregation of the Relationship Officer from the
approving authority. The relationship officer should be the owner of the customer relationship
and must be held responsible to ensure the accuracy of the entire credit application submitted for
approval. The relationship officer must be familiar with the lending guidelines of the financial
institution and should conduct due diligence on new borrowers and guarantors. The results of
credit assessment should be recommended for approval by the relationship team and forwarded
to Credit Risk Management for review and assessment. The credit should subsequently be
approved by proper approval committee.
Sub-loan Agreement
In addition to the normal process of credit appraisal and sanctioning of commercial loans, the
PFI confirms and endorses the compliance of the Sub-loan by examining the items falling under
the requirement for compliance mentioned above and proceed for sub-loan contract. The
contents of the Sub-loan Agreement shall contain those requirements described in Section 3.1.

--- Page 20 ---
16

10)
Disbursement of Sub-loan
Upon signing the loan contract, the PFI makes disbursement of the Sub-loan to the account
designated by the Sub-borrower after completion of the PFI‟s appraisal process and signing of
the loan contract but prior to the disbursement of RL against delivery of title document
covenanted.
6. Refinancing Loan
6.1.
Preconditions for Taking Refinancing Loans
Upon receiving the Application for RL from the PFI, PIU checks its record to confirm that the
PFI duly satisfies the pre-conditions for requesting the Sub-loan to be financed by the Project.
The pre-conditions include that
A. The PFI has been duly accredited and appointed in accordance with the procedures
established by the Project;
B. The PFI has not failed to make debt servicing without any reason that are deemed
justifiable by PIU and has no debt outstanding in arrear at the time of requesting PIU for
RL; and
C. The PFI is compliant with the existing policy of Bangladesh Bank including the ratio to
be maintained between cottage, micro and small, and medium enterprises, and the ratio
to be maintained between manufacturing and services, and trading sectors.
The sequential activities work for approving and disbursing the RL can be referred to in Annex 2
– Refinance Program Work Flow Process.
6.2.
Preparation of Application for Refinancing Loan by PFI
The PFI, after disbursing the Sub-loans, prepares and submits to PIU Form Ka (Annex-7),
Application for Refinancing Loan and Form Kha (Annex-7), Request for Disbursement of RL.
The PFI submits Form Ka and Form Kha together. The PFI is allowed to submit the Application
for RL once a month within 10th working day of next month after the month of its loan
disbursement, along with necessary documents set out in the Checklist for Refinance Application
(Annex 8) required by BB. The PFI ensures that the information contained in the Application for
Refinancing Loan is true and correct on the Sub-borrower and the Sub-loan.
Form Ka, Application for RL should be described with the following fundamental information;
A. Applicant of the Sub-loan,
B. Summary of the Sub-loan,
C. Compliance with the Eligibility Requirement under the Project,
D. Related Request being made for RL under the Project.
Form Kha, Request for Disbursement of RL should be described with the following information;

--- Page 21 ---
17

A. Request for Disbursement of the RL,
B. Specifics of Partial Disbursements if applicable, and
C. Account to be credited.
In the Application for RL, the PFI certifies that the Sub-loan and Sub- borrower is compliant
with AIIB‟s Environmental and Social Policy (ESP) including the Environmental and Social
Standards (ESSs) as well as the domestic laws and regulations and that in receiving the
Application for Sub-loan, the PFI has collected the environment related documents required such
as Environmental Clearance Certificate (ECC), Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Initial
Environmental Examination (IEE), etc.
A Demand Promissory (DP) Note needs to be submitted by the PFI at each instance of taking RL
to ensure repayment (principal as well as accrued interest) against sanctioned amount. That DP
Note shall be treated as current security to BB to cover the following:
A. Total receivable amount at present or later on; and
B. All expenses, charges and costs (if any) payable under relevant rules of this program.
6.3.
Examination of the Application for Refinancing Loan by PIU
Upon receipt of the Application for Refinancing Loan, PIU examines the contents described in
the Application and confirms that the descriptions are in compliance with terms and conditions
of RL, eligibility criteria, and in accordance with instructions set out in SMESPD Circulars No.
2, which are summarized to include but not limited to the following areas and items;
A. Eligibility of Sub-borrowers,
B. Eligibility of Sub-loans,
C. Eligible business sector,
D. Eligible purpose and usage of funds,
E. Terms and conditions of the Sub-loan appraised (the ratio of financing, amount, interest,
maturity, etc.)
F. Size of Sub-loan,
G. Rate of interest,
H. Repayment term with grace period,
I. Securities (collateral),
J. Financing structure, and
K. Social and environmental consideration.
For each and every Form Ka, Application for RL submitted, PIU first assigns inward number
with date. After RL disbursement, PIU will assign unique RL number.
During the examination, if any non-compliance issue arises, PIU will notify to the concerned PFI
not exceeding ten (10) business days from the date of receiving the PFI‟s Application for RL.

--- Page 22 ---
18

[Process Flow at Administration and Appraisal Section of PIU]
A. Receiving the Application for Refinancing Loan and Request for Disbursement of RL,
B. Assigning PIU‟s number to each Application,
C. Entering the Application into the RL Control Book,
D. Examining the compliance with the eligibility criteria,
E. Submitting the result of examination to the appropriate authority through the Project
Director,
F. Obtaining approval of the appropriate authority on the RL and disbursement of the funds,
G. Entering the approval date into the RL Control Book,
H. Preparing the Notices of Results to PFIs,
I. Preparing the letter instruction to Accounts and Budgeting Department for fund transfer
by the Desk Officer,
J. Presenting the letter instruction by the Officer in charge to the Project Director for
approval,
K. Ensuring the deposit of Demand Promissory Note duly signed by PFI at PIU,
L. Delivering the letter instruction to Accounts and Budgeting Department, and
M. Entering the disbursement date and amount into the RL Control Book.
6.4.
Disbursement of Refinancing Loan
The Project uses Refinancing Method as stated in Section 3.4. Financing Method.
Upon confirming the compliance with the eligibility requirement, PIU releases the funds for RL
to the account designated by the PFI as soon as possible. PIU notifies the completion of
disbursement of RL to the PFI by sending advice of Disbursement.
In order to maintain the records and accounts of RL disbursement, PIU shall confirm at least the
followings
A. Confirmation of the voucher for the credit entry of the disbursed funds to the PFI‟s
account shall be obtained from the Accounts and Budgeting Department,
B. Entry to be made at PIU of the date, amount and other particulars of RL disbursement to
the RL control book (prospectively equipped in the computerized management system).
6.5.
Amendment of Application for Refinancing Loan
Upon receiving the amended/corrected application of the PFIs against PIU‟s findings as per para
6.3, PIU will reexamine the same.
The sequential steps of process shall be followed in a same manner. The Request for Amendment
shall be processed under the number originally assigned to the Sub-loan at its first submission.
Other steps of the sequence shall remain unchanged.

--- Page 23 ---
19

6.6.
Suspension of Disbursement under the Project
In case where the RL and/or the Sub-loan is not deemed in conformity with the eligibility
requirements and terms and conditions established for the RL and Sub-loan under the Project,
including but not limited to the eligibility of the Sub-borrower, use of funds, and the eligibility
criteria for the PFI, PIU and/or the PFI shall be disallowed and/or suspended to disburse the RL
and/or the Sub-loan. If there are any ineligible expenditure arising from such case, such should
be returned to the Designated Account.
7. Debt Servicing, Rescheduling and Event of Default
7.1.
Notice of Due Dates on Refinancing Loan
The PFI is obliged to make payment of principal and interest on the due dates to the account
designated by PIU irrespective of its receipt of the Notice of Due Dates from PIU.
Recovery information report shall be generated from the e-refinancing system periodically
according to which the Officer in charge at the PIU shall be able to take actions for recovery
without fail.
7.2.
Payment of Interest and Principal on Refinancing Loan

Upon receipt of repayment, PIU notifies the concerned PFI in this regard. The recovery process
shall accompany, among others, the following sequential steps of actions
[Process Flow for recovery at PIU]
A. Monitoring the maturities of the RLs,
B. Sending the Notice of Due Dates to PFI and its copy or summary sheet to the Accounts
and Budgeting Department (A&BD),
C. Preparing for disposal of received funds by Motijheel Office to the effect that the
principal portion shall be credited to Revolving Fund Account, 1/4th of the interest
received to BB‟s Revenue Account and the remaining portion of the interest to GOB‟s
account by A&BD.
D. Confirming the accuracy of the fund transfer,
E. Approval of the receipt of funds by the Project Director,
F. Entering the recovery date and amount to the RL Control Book.

--- Page 24 ---
20

7.3.
Prepayment of Principal of Sub-loan
Upon request by the Sub-borrower, the PFI may accept the prepayment of the Sub-loan, provided
that the request for prepayment is the genuine wish of the Sub-borrower and not the one coerced
by the PFI. The prepayment to be made by the Sub-borrower shall be appropriated to the
installments of principal in the inverse order starting from the last one. The PFI notifies PIU for
the prepayment and makes the arrangement for the prepayment of RL accordingly.
The PFI notifies PIU prepayment of Sub-loan within 07 business days.
7.4.
Prepayment of Principal of Refinancing Loan
Upon receiving Report of Prepayment of Sub-loan from PFI, PIU confirms the reason and
conditions of the prepayment is in order and acceptable. PIU will take necessary measures to
realize repayment of principal amount of RL with interest accrued.
If BB finds that a PFI does not adjust or take necessary steps to adjust any early adjusted fund by
its beneficiary, BB preserves the right to impose penalty at the rate of 2% (two percent) above
than the prevailing rate on such amount for the unadjusted period and to recover the full amount
including interest/profit/penalty at one instance.
7.5.
Rescheduling of Sub-loan
The PFI notifies the PIU about rescheduling of the sub-loan.
7.6.
Non-payment on Due Dates
Should the PFI find any of its Sub-loans failing to make payment on due date, the PFI notifies
PIU the non-payment of the Sub-loan. The non-payment shall be reported immediately to the
appropriate authority through the Project Director. The PFI is obliged to make payment of
principal and/or interest of RLs irrespective of its receipt of payment from the Sub-borrower on
the Sub-loan. The PFI takes steps for recovery of the Sub-loan in accordance with the PFI‟s own
rules and procedures that have been established following the regulations issued by Bangladesh
Bank. PIU may consider providing a caution notice to the other PFIs lending to the same Sub-
borrower, if found through the search efforts, of the non-payment at the first PFI.
8. Environmental and Social
8.1.
BB’s ESRM
BB has established “Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM
Guidelines) for Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh” (ESRM). AIIB has assessed the

--- Page 25 ---
21

ESRM and found it to be consistent with AIIB‟s Environmental and Social Policy. The ESRM
will be applicable for this Project.
8.2.
ESMS Procedures
Each PFI will, as a condition of eligibility for financing under the AIIB loan, be required to
adopt an environmental and social management system (ESMS)in accordance with the ESRM
Guidelines of BB. The figure below outlines the components of the ESMS that each PFI is
required to follow.

Figure 3. Components of an ESMS



Source: Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management for Banks and Financial Institutions in
Bangladesh, BB
8.3.
Evaluating E&S Risk of Sub-loan
The PFIs will follow the provisions specified for MSMEs in the ESRM and undertake the role of
screening, selection, due diligence (DD), implementation and management of compliance of the
sub-borrowers and sub-loans.

--- Page 26 ---
22

The PFIs will carry out screening of sub-loans and assign Environmental and Social (E&S) risk
category as required in the ESRM Guidelines. Certain activities of a sub-loan are not eligible for
financing under the Project. These activities include (1) any Category A and high-risk Category
B activities in accordance with AIIB‟s ESP, (2) activities listed in AIIB‟s Environmental and
Social Exclusion List (ESEL) and, (3)activities listed in the Exclusion List of ESRM Guidelines
of BB. These high-risk Category B sub-loans to be excluded from the AIIB financing are those
transactions that may potentially result in: (i) land acquisition or involuntary resettlement, (ii)
risk of adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples and/or vulnerable groups, (iii) significant risks to
or impacts on the environment, community health and safety, biodiversity, and cultural
resources, and/or (iv) significant occupational health and safety risks.
For SMEs involving medium risk activities as defined in the ESRM of BB and for the medium
enterprise sector, the PFI is required to carry out ES due diligence (ESDD). A time-bound ES
Action Plan (ESAP) will also be prepared and relevant covenants will be included in the loan
documentation. For the small enterprise sector with low ES risk activities, BB‟s Exclusion List
presented in the ESRM will be applied, in addition to AIIB‟s ESEL.
A team will be formed in PIU where staff from the Sustainable Finance Department (SFD) of BB
will be included to implement the ESRM Guidelines for this project through requiring
appropriate screening, approval and monitoring procedures for PFIs and sub-loans.
8.4.
Monitoring E&S Risk and Reporting

Sub-borrowers should conduct self-monitoring or monitoring by independent third parties and/or
regulatory authorities. During the monitoring process, sub-borrowers will self-report E&S
performance to respective PFI. The reporting frequency should be tailored to each individual
transaction and agreed in the legal agreement.
Each PFI shall carry out monitoring of sub-borrowers‟ E&S performance in accordance with the
ESRM Guidelines and PFI‟s own Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS). If
non-compliance with the E&S clauses stipulated in the legal agreement is identified, PFI staff
should follow up with the sub-borrower to resolve these in a reasonable time frame. Depending
upon the complexity of the E&S issues associated with a sub-borrower‟s operations, PFI staff
should require a new corrective action plan and/or periodic reports on E&S performance
throughout the duration of the transaction. PFIs will document their findings in the monitoring
checklist as per the latest ESRM Guidelines of BB (Annex-11). PFIs will report to PIU on E&S
risk categorization and Environmental and Social Due Diligence (ESDD) at the portfolio level
along with the monitoring checklists on a sample basis (no less than 20%) to PIU quarterly as per
attached format (Annex 19, QTR_PFI_AIIB-III).
At PIU, staff will review and validate the monitoring checklists submitted by the PFI on a
sample basis (no less than 20%). If there is non-compliance with the E&S requirements of the

--- Page 27 ---
23

Project, PIU should follow up with the PFI who will in turn liaise with the sub-borrower to
resolve the issues in a reasonable timeframe. PIU will submit Annual Environmental and Social
Report (AESR) to AIIB. The suggested outline of the AESR is presented in Annex 12. However,
for any potential requirement AIIB may request PIU to share the PFIs quarterly reports along
with their observation.
8.5.
Project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism
A Project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism will be established at the PIU and PFI levels
based on the existing GRMs. At the PIU level, BB addresses concerns/complaints/grievances
associated with this Project through its Financial Integrity and Customer Services Department
(FICSD). FICSD is the existing grievance channel in BB which will be used in this project.
Aggrieved people can have access to the FICSD through Hotline number 16236, written
application of complain, e-mail etc. Cases are resolved within reasonable time. Communities and
individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of sub-loans may submit
complaints to the existing GRM channels in BB. In addition, SME & Special Programmes
Department has separate Problem Solution Center, particularly deals with complains of CMSME
entrepreneurs.
PFIs have their own GRMs in accordance with respect ESMS. The PFIs will ensure that
information about accessing available GRMs is made available to the stakeholders of the sub-
loans.
PFI will include a summary of grievance log associated with this Project in the Quarterly report
to PIU. The PIU will also report the GRM at both levels to AIIB in the AESR.
8.6.
Independent Accountability Mechanism (IAM)
AIIB‟s Policy on the Project-Affected Peoples Mechanism (PPM) applies to this project. The
PPM has been established by AIIB to provide an opportunity for an independent and impartial
review of submissions from project-affected people who believe they have been or are likely to
be adversely affected by AIIB‟s failure to implement its ESP in situations when their concerns
cannot be addressed satisfactorily through the project-level GRM or the processes of AIIB
Management. Information on AIIB‟s PPM is available at: https://www.aiib.org/en/policies-
strategies/operational-policies/policyon-the-project-affected-mechanism.html
9. Procurement
All goods, works and services to be financed out of the proceeds of a sub-loan must be procured
in compliance with AIIB‟s Procurement Policy and Interim Operational Directive on
Procurement Instructions for Recipients, as amended from time to time.

--- Page 28 ---
24

Procurement appraisal. The PFI must review the Sub-borrower‟s plan for procurement of
goods, works and services to be financed out of the proceeds of each sub-loan and satisfy itself
that such plan is in compliance with established private sector or market practices.
10. Fund Management
10.1. Accounting Policies and Procedures
The accounting policies and procedures of the Project will be governed by the existing Project
Accounting Manual of the MOF. All project-related transactions from all sources (AIIB and
GOB) will be accounted for separately on Cash basis following double-entry bookkeeping
principles.
10.2. Flow of Funds
Figure 4. Flow of Funds

--- Page 29 ---
25

Initial Disbursement
The funds received at the Designated Account from AIIB shall be transferred by PIU under
authorization of MOF to Project Operating Account in Bangladesh Taka from which the
disbursement of RL to the PFI shall be made. For making disbursement of RL to PFIs, PIU
debits the Project Operating Account and credit the account designated by the PFI.
The detailed procedures required to be taken for receiving the funds from AIIB are prescribed in
the Disbursement Letter. AIIB shall, upon receipt of the request for disbursement and the
pipeline of RLs in the prescribed format from PIU, make the initial disbursement in accordance
with the Disbursement Letter.
In order to apply for advance funds, whether it is initial or subsequent disbursements PIU shall
prepare and submit a withdrawal application (WA) to AIIB via mail. The first application may be
shared via email for the Bank team to confirm that the application is correctly completed.
Thereafter, the signed WA needs to be posted to AIIB HQ for processing. The WA shall be
signed by the PD. For this purpose the name, e-mail ID and signature of the PD will be
authorized by the ERD of MOF. The WA will be prepared based on the sub loans already
disbursed by the bank to the sub-borrower.
The funds will be transferred from the DA to the operating account by the Transfer Advice
signed by the PD on the basis of authorization letter of FD of MOF.
Recovery from PFIs
In recovery of RL on due dates, PIU shall inform the PFI of the forthcoming due dates and
inform that the recovery shall be made by debiting the PFI‟s current account maintained at BB
for the amount coming due on the specified due dates.
On due dates notified, PIU of BB shall realize the repayment proceeds by debiting the current
account of concerned PFIs.
Out of the proceeds collected from the PFI‟s account, the PIU shall credit the principal portion of
the proceeds to the Revolving Fund Account whereas the interest portion is split into two parts,
out of which 1/4th shall be credited to BB‟s Revenue Account and 3/4th to MOF‟s account.
Subsequent Disbursement
In order to refinance loans to the PFIs from the revolving fund account, the revolving fund
account must accumulate to 20% of the total prior disbursement made by AIIB. The
disbursement of the second and the succeeding generations of RLs shall be made by debiting the
Revolving Fund Account and crediting the PFI‟s account.

--- Page 30 ---
26

Subsequent disbursements will be made to replenish the Designated Account by AIIB upon
receipt of the request for replenishment accompanied by the following documents;
 Statement of Expenditure for eligible expenditures, and
 Supporting documents evidencing that 80% of previous withdrawals has been disbursed
to the PFIs.
Per the disbursement letter, the PIU will submit quarterly withdrawal applications and summary
of expenditures to record expenditures with AIIB. This will be done whether there is a request
for additional drawdown of funds from AIIB. The minimum and maximum single disbursement
amount will be as specified in the Disbursement Letter.
10.3. Bank Accounts
The Project is required to open and maintain the Designated Account, the Project Operating
Account and the Revolving Fund Account with BB. The officials authorized by the concerned
authority will be the signatories to maintain the respective bank accounts and approve the
payments.
The funds will be transferred from the Designated Account to Project Operating Account by
transfer advice signed by the PD. The funds from the Project Operating Account and the
Revolving Fund Account will be transferred based on the vouchers signed by the officers of the
PIU assigned by the PD and each fund will be transferred with the approval of the PD.
Designated Account (in USD)
Purpose: to receive funds from AIIB
A “Designated Account” (DA) denominated in USD shall be opened and maintained with Forex
Reserve & Treasury Management Department (FRTMD) of BB, in the name of the Project on
behalf of GOB to receive disbursement from AIIB in accordance with the Disbursement Letter.
The DA will have a variable ceiling that is the funds disbursed will be based on a six months
cash forecast. However, the PIU, will prepare and submit quarterly withdrawal applications and
summary of expenditures, to enable the recording of the quarters expenditure in AIIB‟s system.
Project Operating Account (in BDT)
Purpose: for disbursement of RLs to PFIs
A “Project Operating Account” denominated in local currency shall be opened and
maintained with Accounts and Budgeting Department (A&BD) of BB, in the name of the
Project on behalf of GOB. Funds will be transferred from the Designated Account to the
Operating Account before being spent for disbursement of RLs to the PFIs. Advances

--- Page 31 ---
27

received from AIIB to the Designated Account will be transferred to the Project Operating
Account in multiple tranches based on the budget authorization order and the requirements of
the PFIs. All foreign exchange gain/loss will be borne by the GOB.
Revolving Fund Account (in BDT)
Purpose: to receive repayment from PFIs and disburse subsequent RLs to PFIs
A “Revolving Fund Account” shall be opened and maintained with A&BD of BB in the name of
the Project to which the principal portion of repayment from PFIs shall be credited. PIU may
utilize the funds accumulated in the Revolving Fund Account for disbursement until the
revolving account reaches 20% of total prior disbursement made by AIIB.
Accumulated funds of the Revolving Fund Account may be transferred to GOB as needed.
10.4. Fund Management
Authority and Payment Responsibility
Government‟s existing rules and procedures outlined in the Project Accounting Manual with
respect to authority and payment responsibility as well as prevailing delegation of financial
powers will be applicable for the Project.
The designated Project Director and in his/her absence an alternative official will be the
authorized for operating the Project‟s accounts.
The operation of the Designated Account will be governed by the directives of Finance Division
of MOF. The operation of Project Operating Account will be governed by applicable rules and
procedures. However, policy for transferring the balance from the Revolving Fund Account to
government treasury will be formulated by PSC of the Project or Finance Division of MOF.
The Designated Account, Project Operating Account, so maintained for the fund management
will be closed as per rules with the approval of competent authority at the end of the Project. On
the other hand, the Revolving Fund Account will be closed with the approval of competent
authority after all loans are fully repaid by PFIs and repayments are transferred to Government
Treasury.
For closing the Designated Account, Project Operating Account and the Revolving Fund
Account, all Letter or advices will be signed by the PD.
Loan Management and Accounting System
BB‟s existing loan management and accounting systems with a clear segregation of duties,
proper review and authorization of transactions will be followed. PIU will follow the

--- Page 32 ---
28

International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) for accounting and preparation of the
financial statements of the project.
Internal Control
The Designated Account Statement will be prepared by the Forex Reserve and Treasury
Management Department (FRTMD) of Bangladesh Bank and Project Operating Account
Statement and the Revolving Fund Account Statement will be prepared by the Accounts and
Budgeting Department of Bangladesh Bank. All accounts will be reconciled by the officials of
PIU quarterly and at the time when WA is submitted to AIIB.
10.5. Audit
The Internal Audit Department of BB may carry out audit of the project as per policy of the BB
and the internal audit report should be provided to AIIB on request.
Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate (FAPAD) will conduct external audit of the Project
within six (6) months after the end of a fiscal year. Audit will be performed on the Project‟s
financial statements including (1) Sources and Uses of Funds (Annex 13), (2) Statements of
Designated Account, Project Operating Account, and Revolving Fund Account (Annex 13), and
(3) Statement of Expenditure (Annex 15). PIU will keep in touch with FAPAD to resolve audit
observations/objections upon receipt of the external audit report. Project Director will be
responsible for audit follow-up and for taking remedial actions.
10.6. Project Financial Report
Interim Un-audited Financial Report (IUFR)
PIU shall prepare IUFR and submit it to AIIB semi-annually no later than 45 days after the end
of semiannual period, i.e., by June and December of each fiscal year until the completion of the
Project. The IUFR also includes (1) Statements of Designated Account, Project Operating
Account, and Revolving Fund Account, (2) Sources and Uses of Funds Statement, and (3)
Statement of Expenditure (Annex 15). The status of settlement of audit observations should be
submitted along with IUFR. The formats of IUFR which are pre-agreed with AIIB, are shown in
Annex 13 in this OM. The IUFR will also be supported by account statements, account
reconciliations and snapshot of the account balance per general ledger, for each project bank
account as at the end of the reporting period.
The Designated Account Statement will be prepared by the Forex Reserve and Treasury
Management Department (FRTMD) of Bangladesh Bank and Project Operating Account
Statement and the Revolving Fund Account Statement will be prepared by the Accounts and
Budgeting Department of Bangladesh Bank. Sources and Uses of Funds Statement will be

--- Page 33 ---
29

prepared by the PIU officials assigned by the PD which will be reviewed and approved by the
PD.
Annual Audit Report
PIU shall prepare the Project‟s annual financial statements in the format shown in Annex 14 after
the end of a fiscal year and submit it to FAPAD for external audit within three months after the
end of each fiscal year. FAPAD will conduct the audit according to their audit Terms of
Reference (TOR). After conducting the audit FAPAD will discuss with PIU officials about any
conflict or misunderstanding, and resolve any conflict or misunderstanding between FAPAD and
PIU. The issues which cannot be resolved by the discussion between FAPAD and PIU will be
treated as discrepancy and those issues will be included in the audit report or management letter
of FAPAD. The Audit Report along with the management response on the management letter
issued by the auditor should be submitted to AIIB annually within nine (9) months after the end
of each fiscal year, i.e., by September of each fiscal year until the completion of the Project. The
financial statements include (1) Sources and Uses of Funds (Annex 14), (2) Statements of
Designated Account, Project Operating Account, and Revolving Fund Account (Annex 14), and
(3) Statement of Expenditure (Annex 15). The financial statements will also include notes to the
financial statements disclosing the detailed assumptions made in the preparation of the financial
statements.
At minimal, the Auditors should provide an opinion on the (i) financial statements, (ii) eligibility
of expenditures incurred and reported to the Bank (through SOE and IUFRs), and (iii)
compliance with the loan agreement, and relevant laws and regulations and issue management
letter for any internal control deficiency identified during the audit. PIU shall make available to
FAPAD project document, financing agreement, Disbursement Letter, project agreement,
operational manual, participation agreement, statement of loan paid to the sub-borrowers by the
PFIs, bank statements, interim unaudited financial reports and statement of expenses submitted
to the AIIB during the fiscal year and all supporting documents required for the audit to the
auditor.
11. Monitoring
An effective credit monitoring is a key element that ensures the soundness of the whole
performance and leads to the ultimate success of the Project. The institutions concerned are
asked to exert the utmost diligence in closely monitoring and following up the progress of the
Project.
11.1. Monitoring by PFI
The PFI is responsible for monitoring the progress of the Project at the level of Sub-borrowers
and Sub-loans individually and collectively. The PFI is obliged to monitor closely, the progress

--- Page 34 ---
30

of the Sub-loan through site visits and management interviews. For individual Sub-loan
monitored, the PFI shall report the findings from monitoring activities to PIU immediately and
indicated the steps take or to be taken to remedy the issues.
In addition, the PFI shall report to PIU regularly the results of its monitoring by creating the
Progress Report and On-going Sub-loan Summary Report on Quarterly basis in prescribed
format (Annex 18-A and Annex 18-B).
The PFI‟s monitoring should focus on the following aspects of the Sub-loan
Progress of Individual Sub-loan
A. Proper usage of the Sub-loan proceeds,
B. Orderly performance in operation,
C. Sufficiency in capability of manufacturing, marketing, operation,
D. Development of market conditions,
E. Sales turnover,
F. Cash flow,
G. Number and change in employment, and
H. Social and Environmental Protection.
Financial Conditions of Sub-borrower
A. Overall business performance of the enterprise,
B. Overall cash flow of the enterprise,
C. Assets and liabilities,
D. Trend of profits,
E. Sufficiency in Working capital
F. Constraints in financing,
G. Difficulty in debt servicing, and
H. Change in overall employment.
Overall Soundness of the Sub-loan Portfolio
A. Number of Sub-loans approved,
B. Amount disbursed in Sub-loans,
C. Amount collected from Sub-loans,
D. Sub-loans rescheduled,
E. Sub-loans in arrear,
F. Sub-loans in default, and
G. Sub-loans classified as non-performing loan.

--- Page 35 ---
31

11.2. Measurement of Monitoring Indicators
Aside from the monitoring of the individual Sub-loan, the PFI shall collect and report the
qualitative and quantitative data of Monitoring Indicators that should be indispensable for PIU to
compile the Quarterly Report to AIIB.
The data required as the Monitoring Indicators are comprised of the following items
Result Monitoring Indicators
A. Percentage of nonperforming loans in the PFIs‟ portfolio refinanced through AIIB
facility
B. Number of eligible sub-borrowers receiving financing
C. Percentage of loan value in cottage, micro and small enterprises
D. Percentage of loan value in medium enterprises
E. Number of sub-borrowers with women owners or with one or more women in
executive positions
F. Number of PFIs
G. Number of jobs created/retained by sub-borrowers (disaggregated by gender)
11.3. Monitoring of Social and Environmental Impact
PFI shall assess and monitor the social and environmental impacts associated with Sub-loan, and
inform PIU their compliance with BB ESRM Guidelines by submitting Quarterly Monitoring
Report on E&S Risk Categorization, ESDD and E&S Monitoring (Annex-19, QTR_PFI_AIIB-
III).
Although it is defined that there shall be no Sub-loan with significant adverse impact on the
environment under the scheme and limited negative impacts are expected for the Project, PIU
shall immediately report to AIIB, and cause the PFI to report to PIU, any negative effect if and
whenever it is observed during the implementation of Sub-loan.
The PFI is held responsible for monitoring the social and environmental impact of the Sub-loan.
The result of the monitoring by the PFI shall be reported to PIU by the periodical as well as the
ad-hoc report. PFI Monitoring Report on E&S Risk Categorization, ESDD and E&S Monitoring
(Annex-19, QTR_PFI_AIIB-III)within which the columns are assigned for reporting of the
Environmental Category of the Sub-loan based on BB‟s and AIIB‟s Environmental and Social
Guidelines and the adverse impact, if any, that has been observed.
11.4. Monitoring by PIU
PIU remains responsible for monitoring the progress of the Project at the level of the PFIs and
the PFIs‟ management of Sub-loans individually and collectively. PIU remains obliged to

--- Page 36 ---
32

monitor closely, regularly at pre-determined intervals, the progress of the Project through site
visits to the PFIs and the Sub-Borrowers.
PIU shall execute following courses of actions to discharge its monitoring obligation under the
Project
A. To collect the reports generated by the PFIs in the form of Quarterly Progress Report
(Annex 18-A, QTR_PFI_AIIB-I), Quarterly Report on On-going Sub-project Summary
(Annex 18-B, QTR_PFI_AIIB-II) , and Quarterly Monitoring Report on E&S Risk
Categorization, ESDD and E&S Monitoring (Annex-19, QTR_PFI_AIIB-III).


B. To aggregate the collected data and grasp the total picture on the progress of the Project,
C. To analyze the compiled data,
D. To conduct field survey/inspection of the PFIs and the Sub-borrowers, should it be found
necessary by PIU,
E. To grasp and assess the performance of the PFIs individually,
F. To identify weakness and/or problems,
G. To develop the measures for solution and/or improvement,
H. To prepare the Quarterly Progress Report to be submitted to AIIB quarterly, and
I. To give guidance to the PFIs.
11.5. Periodical Reporting –Quarterly Progress Report
PIU shall report the findings from monitoring activities in sending AIIB and Steering Committee
in the form of Quarterly Progress Report. For compilation of the Report, PIU shall require the
PFI to submit periodically the pertinent data and information in the prescribed format (Annex 18-
A, Annex 18-B and Annex 19).

11.6. Monitoring by Steering Committee
Steering Committee discusses policy issues relevant to the implementation and management of
the Project, including but not limited to the following
A. Approval of the Operations Manual,
B. Approval of the Accreditation Criteria of PFIs,
C. Review of the performance of the Project,
D. Review of the PFIs‟ performance, and
E. Discussion of issues that may arise requiring the Committee‟s judgment, including
the frequency of disbursement of RL.
The approval and decision above made shall be sent to AIIB for concurrence before such will be
put into operation. The Committee and the Committee member shall be informed of the

--- Page 37 ---
33

feedbacks of lessons learnt that should be used for reflection into the policy formulation in the
areas related to the Project, etc.
11.7. Inspection
For the purpose of monitoring of the Project, AIIB and/or PIU may initiate visits for inspection
to the Sub-borrowers. It will involve physical visits to the Sub-borrower and therefore, the PFI
and the Sub-borrower shall be required to accept such and to extend cooperation required by the
Inspecting Institution and its Inspector. No standard procedure is established for executing the
inspection. The following sites and parties may be visited for such inspection and relevant
records and documents may be examined:
A. PIU,
B. PFIs, including their branch offices, and
C. Sub-borrowers‟ office
Depending upon the cases, AIIB may entrust PIU to conduct inspection on its behalf. PIU and
PFIs shall cause necessary arrangement to be appropriately made enabling such inspections to be
carried out orderly.
11.8. AIIB’s Monitoring Visit
Subject to travel disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, AIIB will carry out monitoring
visits, physically or virtually, to BB and selected PFIs biannually to oversee the implementation
of the project. No technical assistance is envisaged.

--- Page 38 ---
34

12. Reporting
The results of monitoring activities of the PFIs are channeled into PIU for overseeing, reviewing
and examining. PIU stores those data and materials for analysis and compilation of its reporting
to the parties concerned, including AIIB, GOB, etc. AIIB requires the following reports to be
submitted regularly at the intervals stated. The formats for reporting are to be pre-agreed by AIIB
and PIU.
Figure 5: Reports to AIIB and Due Dates

No.
Requested Report
Frequency
Due Date
Monthly
List of newly accredited PFIs

PIU shall submit a list of PFIs newly
accredited by PIU during the month, until
the completion of the project
Monthly
5 days from the last
working day of month
Quarterly
Summary Report of On-going Sub-
project (Annex 16)


Quarterly (as of
the
end
of
March,
June,
September,
December)
No later than 15 days after
the end of each calendar
quarter
until
after
the
Completion of the Project
Quarterly Progress Report (Annex 17)
Same as above
Same as above
Up-to-date list of the eligible PFIs
Same as above
Same as above
Semi-annually
Semi-annual
Unaudited
Interim
Financial Report (IFR) (Annex 13)

The
reports
include
Statement
of
Designated Account, Project Operating
Account, Revolving Fund Account and
Statement of Expenditure
Semi-annually
(as of the end
of
June,
December)
No later than 45 days after
the end of each semiannual
period
until
after
the
Completion of the Project
Annually
Annual
Environmental
and
Social
Monitoring Report (Annex 12)

Annually (as of
the
end
of
December)
No later than nine months
after the end of each fiscal
year
until
after
the
Completion of the Project
PFI Performance Review

Same as above
Same as above

--- Page 39 ---
35

in the format in which PIU reports to the
Steering Committee
Audit Report

Audit shall be made on the Statements of
Designated Account, Project Operating
Account, Revolving Fund Account and the
Statements of Expenditure by FAPAD
Same as above
Same as above
Annual Report of the Project

Including the balance sheet, profit and loss
statement
Same as above
Same as above
10
Audited Financial Statement of PFIs
Annually
No later than 120 days
from the end of Financial
Year
Only Once
12
Project Completion Report

Once
Six
months
after
the
Completion of the Project
13. Promotion of the Project
13.1. Publicity Promotion
PIU takes a leadership role in developing the publicity promotion. It will organize various means
of promotion including but not limited to; posters, booklet, brochure, video, newspaper
advertisement, TV run messages, etc if necessary. PIU plans, prepares and executes the publicity
promotion in active utilization of the means and media discussed.PIU may consider and discuss
the publicity promotion with the parties concerned for SME promotion including but not limited
to; Ministry of Industries (MOI), Ministry of Commerce (MOC), FBCCI, Small and Medium
Enterprise Foundation (SMEF), etc. in seeking the opportunities of co-working for promoting the
Project. PIU may consider to mobilize BB‟s regional branch offices to contact with local
business associations for planning and implementing the promotional events. Participation of the
PFIs in such activities is expected

Budget support for this type of activities will be arranged from Bangladesh Bank sources or as
per decision of the PSC.
13.2. Advisory Services
In order to make the Project better accessible and easily available, the PFIs are recommended to
establish or assign a particular unit of their branch networks to provide advisory services to the
prospective SME clients concerning on how an SME can make use of the funds provided by the

--- Page 40 ---
36

Project. The advisory services that the PFIs are expected to render to the Sub-borrowers and
potential beneficiaries of the Project include but not limited to the following
A. Guidance on the basic terms and conditions of financing under the Project,
B. Guidance on all the requirement for the Sub-borrower to follow at one time upon
delivery of application form,
C. Guidance for filling up the application form, and
D. Sufficient time allowed for preparation, question and answer.

13.3. Capacity Building of PIU and PFIs’ Staff

A. Capacity Development of the PIU is the key for successful implementation of the project.
Training, workshop, seminar, study visit, etc. may be arranged on project management
(compliance, supervision, monitoring, and evaluation) for the PIU officials
B. PIU may be requested by the PFI for assisting the establishment of training programs and
its execution. PIU may extend assistances to the PFI in such manners as; holding
seminars/workshop for the Project inviting the PFIs‟ staff; sending lecturers to the
training program that the PFI organizes; developing and providing training materials;
extending on-site advices to the branch offices, SME dedicated desks, SME Service
Centers, etc. For general training of SME finance, Bangladesh Institute of Bank
Management (BIBM) and Bangladesh Bank Training Academy (BBTA) are providing
several courses in SME financing which can be availed by the PFI for strengthening its
institutional capacity in SME lending. The PFI is requested to report the performance of
the capacity building activities when submitting PFI Report on Monitoring Indicators.
C. Budget support for capacity building activities will be arranged from Bangladesh Bank
sources or as per decision of the PSC.

--- Page 41 ---
37

Annex 1: Requirement for Modification of Policy Guidelines


(Ref. Section 1.2)

Guideline
Authority for
significant
modification
Reporting
Requirement
Steering Committee


 composition
MOF-FD
 member
MOF-FD
 functions
MOF-FD
Project Implementation Unit
 organogram
BB
 functions
BB
Subsidiary Loan Agreement
 covenants
Participation Agreement
 terms and conditions
Steering
Committee/AIIB
 eligibility criteria
Steering Committee/
AIIB
 other covenants
Steering Committee
Sub-loan Agreement
 obligations
Steering Committee
Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs)

 accreditation criteria
Steering
Committee/AIIB
 list of accredited PFIs
PIU/ AIIB
Steering Committee

--- Page 42 ---
38

Annex 2: Refinance Scheme Process Flow Diagram (Ref. Section 6.1)

--- Page 43 ---
39


Source: Bangladesh Bank

Note: SAP AC = SAP Access Control, BB = Bangladesh Bank, CBS = Core Banking System, FI = financial institution, GL =
General ledger

--- Page 44 ---
40

Annex 3: Brief Terms and Conditions of Sub-loan and Refinancing Loan
(Ref. Section 3.2)

Summary Terms and Conditions of Sub-loan
Lender:
The PFIs
Borrower:
Clients of PFIs (eligible activity for which a Sub-loan is extended which
is limited, in the case of MEs, to working capital (employee wages,
inventory, payments on short term debt and other day to day operating
expenses) of the Sub-borrower, and, in case of CMSEs, to working
capital of the the Sub-borrower and term loan facilities (up to 3 years)
for renovation and decoration of existing infrastructure and purchases of
short-to-mid-term assets) (See “Eligibility Criteria for Sub-borrowers)
Currency:
Bangladesh Taka
Terms and Conditions
Term:
1 years (excl. grace up to 3 months)
Interest rate:
9% per annum, 4% of which will be paid by the client(s) and the rest 5%
will be given by the government directly to the Banks/NBFIs as subsidy
Repayment
Schedule:
To be determined by arrangement between PFI and the client in
compliance with the rules and regulations prevailing in Bangladesh
Interest
payment:
To be determined by arrangement between PFI and the clientin
compliance with the rules and regulations prevailing in Bangladesh
Prepayment:
To be determined by arrangement between PFI and the clientin
compliance with the rules and regulations prevailing in Bangladesh
Security:
To be determined by arrangement between PFI and the clientin
compliance with the rules and regulations prevailing in Bangladesh
Summary Terms and Conditions of Refinancing Loan
Lender
BB
Borrower
Eligible PFIs
Currency
Bangladesh Taka
Terms & Conditions:
Term (grace):
1 years excl. grace up to 3 months)
Interest rates:
4% per annum
Interest payment:
Quarterly (calculated on accrual basis)
Penalty:
Overdue not expected, as BB will realize the installment amount plus
applicable interests by debiting them against the current account of the
concerned PFI maintained with BB.
In case that a PFI fails to repay any installment of loan as per the
repayment schedule, BB may realize the installment amount plus 2%
interests.
Security
PFIs will have to submit Demand Promissory (DP) Note against the
refinance amount during each instance of availing refinance facility. This
DP Note will be treated as ongoing security for BB‟s current and future
receivable (with applicable charges & expenses on refinance) to that PFI
for the refinanced fund.

--- Page 45 ---
41

Annex 4: Participation Agreement between BB and PFI
(Ref. Section 2.3.D, 3.2)

Participation Agreement between Bangladesh Bank and ………………..


Participation Agreement between Bangladesh Bank

And

----------------------- Limited

This Agreement is signed on the ----------- day of, --------------, 2020 CE

Between

Bangladesh Bank, the Central Bank of Bangladesh, established under the Bangladesh Bank
Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 127 of 1972), having its head office at Motijheel Commercial Area,
Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh (hereinafter called BB) which expression shall unless excluded by or
repugnant to the context be deemed to mean and includes its successors-in-interest, legal
representatives, administrators and assigns.
And
------------------------ Limited, a ----------------- Bank of Bangladesh, incorporated under the
Companies Act 1994 and governed by the Bank Companies Act, 1991/Financial Institutions
Act,1993 and carrying business under the BB's license no --------------------------------- dated
, having its head office at -----------------------------------------------------------, Bangladesh
(hereinafter called the Participating Financial Institution or PFI) which expression shall unless
excluded by or repugnant to the context be deemed to mean and includes its successors-in-
interest, legal representatives, administrators and assigns.

PREAMBLE
Whereas,
a) Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) has provided a loan fund of USD 300 million
to Government of Bangladesh (GOB) under COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response
Facility Project (CECRFP)(NO PD000415-BGD) for supporting credit expansion and reduce
liquidity constraints brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic to CMSMEs in Bangladesh on a
sound macroeconomic basis.

b) Bangladesh Bank has been entrusted with the responsibility to administer the AIIB loan
under CECRFP on behalf of GOB under the Subsidiary Loan Agreement dated ----------------
---, 202-- and any further amendments thereafter;

c) Through the issued Circular, interested banks and non-bank financial institutions (PFIs) are
requested to enter into a participation agreement with BB to avail refinance facility for up to
50% (fifty percent) of the sanctioned amount of working capital or term loan up to three
years disbursement by a PFI as per approved manner directed by SMESPD, BB (as per
SMESPD Circular No. -----------2 Dated ---------------, 202-- ) to support credit expansion

--- Page 46 ---
42

and reduce liquidity constraints brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic to CMSMEs in
Bangladesh.

d) The PFI fulfills the eligibility criteria as set forth in Annexure 05 of project document and
SMESPD Circular No. ---------------/2020 dated , 2020 and is willing to
avail refinance facility from the above mentioned fund on terms and conditions described
in the said Circular.

e) ----------------- Bank/NBFI Limited, a --------------- Bank/NBFI licensed and approved by BB,
has agreed to act as the Participating Financial Institution (PFI) to receive the AIIB fund
from BB and also to payback the released fund to BB, complying with all relevant
circulars/circular letters of BB, with accrued interest as per pre-determined terms and
conditions as mutually agreed upon by BB and -----------Bank/NBFI Limited.

f) It is required to enter into an agreement between BB and the Participating Financial
Institution (PFI) (hereinafter the --------------- Bank/NBFI Limited) for making necessary
transactions (debits and credits), from and to, between the BB and the ----------------
Bank/NBFI Limited, against the fund approved by BB to --------------- Bank/NBFI Limited.

Now, therefore, both parties hereto hereby agree as follows:

Section-01: Definition

Unless the context otherwise requires, the several terms used in the preamble to this Agreement
have the respective meaning therein set forth and the following additional terms have the
following meanings:
a) „Bank‟ means any banking company operating in Bangladesh having license from BB.
b) „BB‟ means „Bangladesh Bank‟.
c) „BDT‟ means „Bangladeshi Taka‟.
d) „Beneficiary‟ means any enterprise to which the Participating Bank/ Non-bank Financial
Institution has provided or will provide working capital or term loan facility under this
Refinance Scheme.
e) „CMSME‟ means „Cottage, Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise‟ as per BB policy.
f) „NBFI‟ means any Non-bank financial institution engaged in financing and leasing business
having license from BB.
g) „Fund‟ means „Amount of the refinance facility provided under this scheme or this refinance
scheme as a whole‟ by BB, unless explicitly referred to anything else.
h) „PFI‟ means participating bank or Non-bank financial institution under this Agreement.
i) „SMESPD‟ means „SME and Special Programmes Department‟ of BB.
“AIIB-PIU” means a unit established at SMESPD of BB to specifically handle all relevant
tasks related to the AIIB fund under CECRFP.

Section-02: Objectives

The objectives of the agreement are as follows:
a) To ensure that the PFI declares its commitment to the objective of the fund provided by AIIB
and introduced by BB vides SMESPD Circular No. --------; dated ---------------------, 202--- or
as amended from time to time and to this end support COVID-19 affected CMSMEs through

--- Page 47 ---
43

working capital or term loan financing with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity
with appropriate administrative, financial and banking practice.
b) To ensure that the PFI declares its commitment to comply with all circulars/circular
letters/policies of BB those govern the operation and objectivity of the fund.
c) To receive the fund from BB as and when BB releases and transfers the same to the account
of PFI and also, payback the released fund to BB including the accrued interest, as per pre-
determined terms and conditions and pre-scheduled times as mutually agreed by both parties.


Section-03: Terms and Conditions for Refinance Facility

BB shall release fund in favor of PFI {upon submitting the required documents; loan application,
Trade license, NID, Account statement etc. to BB) against the disbursed loan/investment under
the following terms and conditions:
The refinance facility shall be administered under the terms and conditions set forth in
SMESPD Circular No. ---------------; dated -----------------, 20---- or as amended from
time to time and other relevant circulars/circular letters/policies and Guidelines on
Environmental & Social Risk Management for Banks and Financial Institutions of BB.
ii.
A PFI can only avail up to 50% (fifty percent) of its sanctioned loans/investments limits
approved in accordance with SMESPD Circular No. ------------; dated -----------------------
--, 20---- and as approved by SMESPD at the time of application for refinance facility.
iii.
Refinancing facilities will be made available to the PFI on “first come first served” basis
and subject to the availability of balance in the Project Operating Account and the
Revolving Fund Account. Bangladesh Bank shall reserve the right to meet the request for
refinance of the PFIs in part or in full as considered appropriate by BB out of the
available fund.
iv.
BB will have the discretion to refuse any claim for refinance made by PFIs, if it considers
such claim is not in conformity to the objectives and terms and conditions of the
refinance scheme set forth in SMESPD Circular No. -------------------; dated ----------------
-------,20--- or as amended from time to time.
The duration of the fund will be for 03(three) years on revolving basis for working
capital or term loan financing only.
vi.
Interest/profit rate for this fund is 4% (four percent) per annum, and it will be
imposed/charged/accounted on quarterly basis. The PFI shall apply the interest rate
maximum of 9% on the Sub-loans made to the Sub-borrowers (4% of which will be
borne by the Sub-borrowers and 5% will be given by the government as subsidy to the
PFIs as mentioned in SMESPD Circular no. 1 dated 13 April 2020).
vii.
PFI shall apply for the fund in prescribed format (as amended from time to time) to BB at
the end of each month within 10 working days of the next month along with necessary
documents or as required by BB from time to time.
Maximum tenure for RL at PFI level is one (1) year (excluding grace period). But the
principal amount of the Sub-loans made available by the PFIs shall be: in case of Sub-
loan Agreements with MEs, repayable over a period not exceeding one (1) year from the
date of the relevant Sub-loan Agreement, exclusive of an up to three (3) months grace
period, and in the case of Sub-loan Agreements with CMSEs, repayable over a period not
exceeding three (3) years from the date of relevant Sub-loan Agreement, exclusive of an
up to three (3) months grace period.

--- Page 48 ---
44


viii.
Grace period up to 03(three) months may be provided to a PFI if it provides the same to
its beneficiary.
ix.
A beneficiary can take advantage of this fund for one period/tenure only through one of
the PFIs, and only during the duration of this revolving facility on „First Come First
Served‟ basis. In case a beneficiary cannot avail this fund due to the PFI exceeds its limit,
it can proceed through another PFI for such. Once a beneficiary receives any facility from
this fund, he/she is no longer eligible for availing any facility from this fund again.
A Demand Promissory (DP) Note to be submitted by the PFI at each instance of taking
refinance to ensure repayment (principal as well as accrued interest) against sanctioned
amount.
xi.
That DP Note shall be treated as current security to BB to cover the following:
a. Total receivable amount at present or later on; and
b. All expenses, charges and costs (if any) payable under relevant rules of this program.
xii.
At any time, in spite of credit balance or partial repayment or more or less in the
accounting or repatriation of any portion of the security, the Demand Promissory Note
shall be treated as current security which is payable to BB.
xiii.
Letter of Authority will be handed over to the PFI to maintain the General A/c with BB
for debiting the repayment of installments of the refinance facility.
xiv.
BB will realize the amount refinanced to a PFI along with applicable interest/profit/
charges on maturity or completion of 1 year, whichever is earlier, from the date of
refinance by debiting their current accounts maintained with the Motijheel Office of BB.
xv.
If a PFI fails on a scheduled payment for any unacceptable cause, BB will preserve the
right to exclude such Banks/NBFIs from this refinance facility.
xvi.
If the PFI is found to have received refinance under the scheme on the basis of false or
incorrect statement or information, or for any purpose other than implied in the
agreement, BB will have the right to impose and recover penalty at a time at the rate of
2% (two percent) above than the prevailing rate on the refinanced amount for the entire
refinanced period and can recover the full amount including interest/profit/penalty at one
instance.
xvii.
If BB cannot recover scheduled installments due to PFI‟s insufficient balance, it
preserves the right to impose penalty at the rate of 2% (two percent) above than the
prevailing rate on the installment amount for the overdue period and to recover the full
amount including interest/profit/penalty at one instance.
xviii.
If BB finds that a PFI does not adjust or take necessary steps to adjust any early adjusted
fund (in case of final settlement and closing the loan account) by its beneficiary, BB
preserves the right to impose penalty at the rate of 2% (two percent) above than the
prevailing rate on such amount for the unadjusted period and to recover the full amount
including interest/profit/penalty at one instance.
xix.
Necessary initiatives will be taken to recover the loans by the PFI at field level. But there
will be no relationship, whatsoever, between the recoveries of disbursed amount by the
PFI with repayment of principal and accrued interest to BB.
xx.
This Agreement in total or in part(s) thereof shall stay in force until BB notifies the PFI
on the termination of granting refinance facilities. This notification shall be in writing at
least 03(three) months before it becomes effective.

--- Page 49 ---
45

xxi.
The PFI shall preserve all the documents under this working capital or term loan up to
three years facility and refinance facilities availed as per SMESPD Circular No. -----------
------; dated or as amended from time to time to ensure quick access to them for any
necessity.
xxii.
BB can inspect the entire project financed by PFIs and ask to provide any related
documents of the same before and after refinancing. PFIs should provide the required
documents to BB as and when requested from time to time.

Section-04: Terms and Conditions for PFI

PFIs shall meet the following terms and conditions:
The PFIs should ensure its approval of sub-loans complies with the eligibility criteria of
sub-loan and sub-borrowers, and the terms and condition of sub-loans, as set out in
Section 3.1 in the operations manual, as well as the provisions as per schedule section
I.E.3 of the Project Agreement signed between AIIB and BB.
ii.
To comply with all the rules and regulations applicable to banks and financial institutions
in Bangladesh;
iii.
To comply with the eligibility criteria at all times unless the PFI is at the remedial stage
and is so allowed by BB;
iv.
To comply with all the terms and conditions of sub-loans as specified below as well as in
the operations manual;
To conduct its operations and affairs, with due diligence and efficiency and in accordance
with sound administrative, financial, economic and managerial standards;
vi.
To supervise and monitor the proposed use of sub-loans to assure that the purpose of the
project shall be accomplished;
vii.
To disclose or submit all information required by PIU, including, but not limited to,
audited financial statements and reports required by PIU for the implementation and
monitoring of the project;
viii.
To provide prompt notice, upon becoming aware, of any information it obtains regarding
a violation of AIIB‟s Prohibited Practices Policy by the PFI and the sub-borrower or any
person acting on its behalf;
ix.
To allow PIU to suspend, terminate or withdraw loan when violations are observed;
To enable PIU, BB or AIIB to inspect the PFI or any sub-borrowers and review any
relevant records and documents maintained by the PFI, if PIU, BB or AIIB so requests;
xi.
To maintain a lending and investment policy conducive to the growth and development
of small and medium-sized enterprise sector and maintain suitable procedures and an
adequate number of suitably qualified staff to enable it effectively appraise the financial
and environmental risk of sub-loan in accordance with sound lending and investment
policy and in keeping with the principles, terms and conditions of existing policies of
Bangladesh Bank, which are applicable for CMSME financing.
xii.
To provide detail of sub-loan disbursements in the agreed interval and submit reports
within the agreed period to PIU as per prescribed formats, or as mentioned by the
Bangladesh Bank from time to time for refinancing.
xiii.
To maintain separate monitoring units for this project.
xiv.
To maintain a financial management system and prepare financial statements (balance
sheet, income statement and statement of sources and application of funds) in accordance

--- Page 50 ---
46

with consistently applied Bangladesh accounting standards primarily based on
International Financial Reporting Standards acceptable to the Project Implementing
Entity, both in a manner adequate to reflect its operations, resources and expenditures
under the Refinancing Loan; and
xv.
To have such financial statements audited by independent auditors, in accordance with
consistently applied and internationally accepted auditing standards, and furnish the
statements as so audited to the Project Implementing Entity not later than six (6) months
after the end of the PFI‟s fiscal year;
xvi.
To review beneficiary‟s plan for procurement of goods, works and services to be financed
out of the proceeds of each sub-loan and satisfy itself that such plan is in compliance with
established private sector or market practices.


Section-05: Validity of the Agreement

The tenure of this program will be maximum 03(Three) years. The agreement shall remain in
force until the program is completed and the entire disbursed fund is repaid to BB by the PFIs
with the incurred interest as per the terms and conditions between the parties. However, if both
or either party wants to close the program before the maturity, each party shall notify other party
mentioning their intention to terminate the agreement. Such notification shall be made in writing
at least 01(one) month before it becomes effective.

Section-06: Termination

This Agreement cannot be terminated by either party i.e. BB and/or PFI, except in the event of
one or more of the followings:
a) If the PFI ceases to carry on business or goes into liquidation (other than voluntary
liquidation for the purpose of a bonafide solvent reconstruction or amalgamation the terms of
which have been approved in advance by BB in writing) or is dissolved or struck off;
b) If PFI is unable to pay its debts as they mature or suffers the appointment of a receiver,
administrative receiver or administrator (or any similar official or process under the law of its
domicile or place of incorporation) of the whole or any part of its assets or is the subject of
any bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings;
c) If any of the parties involved in the agreement doesn‟t feel comfort to carry out agreement. In
such case, respective party must give a written notice to other party followed by an amicable
settlement of the dues, if any.
d) If any forces majeure occurs and which lasts more than 30 working days, forces majeure
events shall include but not limited to acts of GOD, natural disasters, epidemics, riots, civil
unrest, military, government or court intervention etc. Any or all acts or obligations
hereunder shall remain suspended for a limited period in the event of any force majeure event
occurring.

Section-07: Amendment or Change
a) BB preserves the right of amalgamation, subtraction or refinement of the abovementioned
conditions.
b) In case of any changes occur in the Agreement between BB and PFI dated ---------/--------
/20…., these changes shall also be applicable for this agreement.

--- Page 51 ---
47

c) In case of any ambiguity or confusion arising interpreting this Agreement, terms and
conditions circulated vide SMESPD Circular No. ------------------------------; dated -------------
-------------- or amended from time to time shall prevail.

This Agreement shall be prepared in two copies as original for both the parties. This agreement
shall come into force and effect on the date of its signing by the two parties.



Witness: 1.





For and on behalf of
(Bangladesh Bank)


(Authorized Representative)



Witness: 1.






For and on behalf of
(---------------------- Limited)


(Managing Director)
------------------- Limited

--- Page 52 ---
48


Annex 5: Eligibility Criteria for PFIs (Ref. Section 4.1)

Eligible Participating Financial Institution

In order to be eligible for financing with proceeds of the project, a PFI must comply with the
following criteria.

A. An organization must be a bank or nonbank financial institution (NBFI), duly licensed,
approved and supervised by BB;
B. It must have minimum three years‟ experience of business operation in banking and/or
finance with audited records (according to the requirements of the national financial
regulatory authority);
C. It should maintain BB declared rate of Capital Adequacy, Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR);
Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) [Note: these conditions are not applicable to state-owned
banks];
D. It should be profitable for two consecutive fiscal years including the latest one;
E. It should have a maximum nonperforming loan of 10 percent [Note: this condition is not
applicable to state-owned banks as stated];
F. It should not be classified as the problem/sick bank and NBFIs or the early warning bank
according to the CAMELS rating for BB‟s monitoring and supervision.
G. It should take proper risk management measure and compliance with anti-money laundering
related guidelines of the Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit (BFIU); the FI should not
have substantially breached AML laws and regulations, or been subject to any significant
findings or recommendation on improvements by the local regulatory authority over the past
three years;
H. It should have adequate organization, management, staff and other resources necessary for its
efficient operation;
I. It should have ES assessment procedures for screening, monitoring and reporting as
acceptable to BB and AIIB;
J. In addition to the above criteria, if banks and financial institutions are deemed to have
significant insufficiency in fulfilling the prudential regulations in the aspects, including but
not limited to the following, and if such insufficiency is deemed to adversely affect their
operations and management, such banks and financial institutions shall not be eligible:
1) Transparency (e.g., submission and/or disclosure of financial statements)
2) Corporate Governance (e.g., control and management of business risk or corruption)
3) Risk Management (e.g., capacity of risk assessment and adoption of adequate procedures)

--- Page 53 ---
49

Annex 6: Eligibility Criteria for Sub-loans and Sub-borrowers
(Ref. Section 3.1, 5.2)
1. Eligible Sub-loans

To be eligible for financing with proceeds of the facility, a sub-loan must meet the following
requirements:

A. The sub-loan must be made only to an eligible sub-borrower for an eligible purpose.
B. The sub-loan must be denominated in the local currency.
C. The maximum tenor of the sub-loan should be one year (excluding grace period), a
maximum grace period of three months may be provided.

2. Eligible Sub-borrowers

To be eligible to receive a sub-loan, the intended sub-borrower of the sub-loan must meet the
following requirements:

A. The sub-borrower must be private sector enterprises in any type of the following:
1) Limited liability company
2) Proprietor; or
3) Partnership
B. The sub-borrower must be in the cottage, micro, small and medium enterprise (CMSME)
sector, with criteria defined by Bangladesh Bank.
C. The size of eligible sub-borrower shall be based on the definition of CMSMEs set by the
2016 Industrial Policy of the Government of Bangladesh which the BB has adopted. It is
based on fixed assets (excluding land buildings) and/or the number of employees. CMSME is
not a public limited company and complies with the following criteria:

Figure 5: Definition of Cottage, Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Adopted by
the Bangladesh Bank

Enterprise size
Fixed asset excluding Land
& Building
Employment
Annual Turnover
(in USD thousands)
(in USD thousands)
Cottage
<12
Max. 15

Manufacturing
12 but <90
16-30
Micro
Service
<12
Max. 15

Trading
<12
Max. 15
240

Manufacturing
90 but <180
31-120
Small
Service
12 but <240
16-50

Trading
12 - 2.4
16-50
240 - 2400
Medium
Manufacturing
1800 – 6000
121-300
(Max 1000 for
RMG/Labor-intensive
industry)
Service
240 – 3600
51-120
Source: SME & Special Programmes Department, Circular No. 02 dated Sep. 5, 2019.

--- Page 54 ---
50

Exception to the definition: RMG and Knitwear sector industries which are a member of BGMEA and/or BKMEA with labor
employment of 100-2000.
Note: If any enterprise falls under a particular category under one criterion (either total fixed assets or employment) but falls
under a larger size category under the other, then the enterprise will be classified into the latter category.

D. The sub-borrower must be registered and operating primarily in the People‟s Republic of
Bangladesh or has a business address in the People‟s Republic of Bangladesh.
E. The sub-borrower must not be a loan defaulter. If a loan of a CMSME is rescheduled for
more than three times that CMSME entity will not be eligible for this facility.
F. A single enterprise/client can avail of funds from this package for a maximum of one year.
G. The maximum lending amounts to each sub-borrower is determined based on banks‟/NBFIs‟
own decision. However, for existing clients the amount should not exceed the bank‟s/NBFI‟s
previous year‟s sector-specific credit limit (new clients are not subject to the limit).
H. The sub-borrower has obtained all necessary local approvals, certifications and permits, and
complies with all applicable national environmental, social, health and safety legislation and
employment regulations and standards in effect.
I. The sub-borrower meets the PFI‟s requirements in, inter alia: creditworthiness, foreign-
exchange position, integrity checks, ES requirements, and procurement practices.
J. The sub-borrower (a) demonstrates the compliance of all their activities with applicable ES
regulatory requirements and commits to maintaining that status during the tenure of the sub-
loan, (b) represents not having recently been administratively or judicially convicted of a
material breach of environmental and social regulations, and (c) is not being reported in
mainstream or social media as materially contravening good ES practices.
K. The sub-borrower must meet the PFI‟s requirements in capacities to, inter alia: ensure
adequate and proper financial accounting of all incomes and expenditures, prepare financial
statements relating to all its activities according to the prescribed policy of the Bangladesh
Bank.
L. The sub-borrower must not be included on AIIB‟s debarment list when the sub-loan is made
or the proceeds of the sub-loan are advanced to it.
M. Neither the sub-borrower nor any person acting on behalf of the sub-borrower has engaged in
any Prohibited Practice under AIIB‟s Prohibited Practices Policy concerning the sub-loan or
other activity being financed.

3. Eligible Purposes

A. The proceeds of a sub-loan may be used only for eligible activity for which a Sub-loan is
extended which is limited, in the case of MEs, to working capital (employees wages,
inventory, payments on short term debt and other day to day operating expenses) of the Sub-
borrower, and, in case of CMSEs, to working capital of the Sub-borrower and term loan
facilities (up to 3 years) for renovation and decoration of existing infrastructure and
purchases of short-to-mid-term assets.
B. The proceeds of a sub-loan may not be used for any of the following purposes:
1) Any activity that appears on AIIB‟s Environmental and Social Exclusion List;
2) Any Category A and high-risk Category B activities, and activities listed in the Exclusion
List of ESRM Guidelines of BB;

--- Page 55 ---
51

3) Any payment to a person or for any import of goods if such payment or import is
prohibited by any resolution of the United Nations Security Council under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter.
C. The proceeds will not be used to adjust existing loans or for balancing, modernization,
rehabilitation and expansion of existing businesses or new initiatives.

4. General Guidelines for Environment and Social Appraisal

PFIs must screen and categorize each sub-loan, review and conduct due diligence on the
environmental and social risks of each sub-loan and review and approve an environmental and
social action plan incorporating the sub-borrower‟s environmental and social commitments
concerning the sub-loan, all in a manner consistent with BB‟s Guidelines on Environmental &
Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh.

For each sub-loan, PFI‟s appraisal of environmental and social risks must include:
A. screening the sub-loan against AIIB‟s Environmental and Social Exclusion List;
B. reviewing and categorizing the sub-loan according to its potential environmental and social
risks and impacts;
C. assessing compliance of the sub-loan with applicable environmental and social laws.

5. Sub-loan Agreement (Loan Contract between PFIs and sub-borrowers)

A. Documentation. If a sub-loan application is approved, the PFIs must enter into a loan
agreement for the sub-loan which provides PFIs with rights adequate to protect their interests
and those of AIIB, including the provisions set out in subparagraph (B) below.

B. Key provisions. Each sub-loan agreement must require the sub-borrower to:
1) use the proceeds of sub-loans exclusively for the eligible activity for which a Sub-loan is
extended which is limited, in the case of MEs, to working capital (employee‟s wages,
inventory, payments on short term debt and other day to day operating expenses) of the
Sub-borrower, and, in case of CMSEs, to working capital of the Sub-borrower and term
loan facilities (up to 3 years) for renovation and decoration of existing infrastructure and
purchases of short-to-mid-term assets
2) carry out the activity being financed with due diligence and efficiency and following
sound technical, economic, financial, managerial, fiduciary, integrity and environmental
and social standards and practices;
3) not engage in any Prohibited Practice in relation to the sub-loan or other activity being
financed, or authorize or permit anyone to do so on its behalf;
4) notify the PFI of any violation of AIIB‟s Policy on Prohibited Practices or if any
international financial institution imposes any sanction on the sub-borrower;
5) manage its operations and carry out the activity being financed following the Guideline
on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Banks and Financial
Institutions in Bangladesh by BB;
6) maintain a financial management system in a manner adequate to reflect the operations,
resources and expenditures related to the activity being financed;
7) prepare financial statements following consistently applied accounting standards;

--- Page 56 ---
52

8) provide right to inspect, by itself or jointly with representatives of BB and/or the AIIB, if
they shall so request, to inspect the activity being financed and any relevant records and
documents;
9) provide right to obtain all such information as AIIB, BB or PFI may reasonably request
relating to the foregoing administration, operations and functional conditions of the sub-
borrower, and to the benefits to be derived from the activity being financed;
10) involve any remedies against the sub-borrower, including suspension, termination, or
withdrawal of the sub-loan, which will be available to PFI by law, in event of failure of
the sub-borrower to perform its obligation under contract with PFI;
11) provide right to take any legal action against the sub-borrower in case of default
following the prevailing rules and regulations and prudential regulations/guidelines of
BB.
12) procure all goods, works and services to be financed out of the proceeds of the sub-loan
in compliance with established private sector or market practices.
13) suspend or terminate the right of the Sub-borrower to withdraw the Sub-loan, or declare
to be immediately due and payable all or any part of the amount of the Sub-loan than
outstanding, upon the Sub-borrower‟s failure to perform any of its obligations under the
Sub-loan Agreement; and
14) provide, promptly as needed, the resources required for its operations
15) procure the goods, works and services to be financed out of the Sub-loan in accordance
with the provisions of the Project Agreement
16) maintain policies and procedures adequate to enable it to monitor and evaluate in
accordance with indicators acceptable to the Bank, the achievement of the Project‟s
objectives

--- Page 57 ---
53


Annex 7: Form Ka - Refinance Loan Application Form
(Ref. Section 5.3.1)

Refinance application sample for financing Bank/FI

Ref: _______________
Date: _______________

General Manager
SME & Special Programmes Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office, Dhaka

Dear Sir,
Application for refinancing under SMESPD Circular No: 06/2021
By drawing your kind attention to the titled subject I would like to inform that, for the month of --
--/20** (Name of the month) a total of BDT__________ (Amount) has been financed by our Bank/FI
against ______ (Number of loans/investments) loans/investments under SMESPD Circular No:
01/2020, dated: April 13, 2020 and SMESPD Circular No.9/2021, dated: September 09, 2021 All the
instructions mentioned in the said circular have been followed properly during the disbursement of those
loans/investments. Information of those loans /investments (Annexure-Kha) has been submitted herewith
for the purpose of receiving refinancing against the loans/investments from the scheme mentioned in
Circular No: 06/2021, dated: June 23, 2021.
Under these circumstances, you are requested to provide refinancing facility of BDT---------------
- (In word------------) [mentioned in attached Annexure-Kha] to our bank from the refinancing scheme
mentioned in SMESPD Circular No: 06/2021.




Yours Faithfully,

Managing Director/
Chief Executive Officer/
Bangladesh Operation Head for Foreign Banks

Phone No:

--- Page 58 ---
54

*OFFICIAL USE ONLY
*OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Form: Kha

Refinance Scheme: CECRFP
Name of Participating Bank/FI:
Reporting Month:
Reporting Year:




For any type of communication related to the Annexure-Kha:
Responsible officer’s name:
Designation:
Office phone:
Mobile phone:
E-mail:
Total Disbursement limit Set by BB:
Maximum Refinance Limit:
Total Refinance received from CECRFP up to Reporting Month:


Borrower Detail
Enterprise Detail
Sl
Enterprise
Name
Full
Name
Contact
phone
number
NID
No.
CIB
Subject
Code
District Sector Subsector
Enterprise
Ownership
Structure
Ownership
by Gender
Type
of
SME
Trade License
No./Registration
no. from RJSC
No. of
Employee
Female
Male
10
11
12
13
14
15
Sub loan Information

Client
Type
Loan ID
(PFIs’
Client
ID/Account
No.)
Sanctioned
Limit
Compliance of
ESRM
Disbursement Date to
Client (ddmmyyyy)
Total
Disbursement
Reporting
Month end
Outstanding
Amt.(
Excluding
interest)
Brach
Name
Tenure
(in
Month)
Claim
Amount
for
Refinance
to
CECRFP
Remarks
(If any)




16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

--- Page 59 ---
60



Annex 8: Refinance Application Checklist (Ref. Section 6.2)


1. Documents Required To Submit With Application:
SL
No.
Name of the Item
Sanction Letter
Trade License of Beneficiary, Validity Date
Copy of National ID
Bank Loan account Statement
Bill of Entry, Invoice, L/C, Quotation
Rate of Interest
Monthly Installment

2. Other Evaluation Parameters:

SL
No.
Name of the Item
1. Signing of Participating Agreement
2. Enterprise Location
3. Fixed Asset
4. Disbursement Date
5. Application Date
6. Disbursed Amount
7. Non Performing Loan (NPL)
8. CRR
9. SLR
10. Capital Adequacy- CAR
11. Advance Deposit Ratio -ADR
12. Compliance
The
Policies
Regarding
“Single
Borrower Exposure Limit”
13. Compliance The Policies Regarding Risk factors





55

--- Page 60 ---
56

Annex 9: Accreditation Assessment Form (Ref. Section 4.3.3)

(Name of Financial Institution:
Fulfill the Criteria
Criterion
Statement
(Yes or No)
(1) Legality
Financial Institution No. with BB:
(2) Operational
Establishment Year:
(Copy of audited financial statements for the latest
years
Experiences
( > 3 years )
attached)
(3) Commitment to
“Expansion of the Lending in SME Sector”
SME Lending
(Copy of lending policies attached)
(4) Capital Adequacy
(a) Capital
Taka
million (as of
in Net Worth
(b) Paid-up Capital
Taka
million (as of
(c) Capital
(as of
Adequacy Ratio
(evaluated by BB)
(>10%)
(5) Profitability
Net Profit
Taka
million (in Fiscal Year ending
Taka
million (in Fiscal Year ending
(6) Non-Performing
NPL Ratio:
(as of
Loans (NPL)
(<10%)
(7) CAMELS Rating
Classification:
(for Fiscal Year ending
(8) Prudential
Regulations
(a) Transparency
(b) Corporate
Governance
(c) Risk
Management
(Copy of risk management procedures attached)
(d) Others, if any

--- Page 61 ---
57


Annex 10: Financial Statements (Ref. Section 4.3.3)

Attachment to Accreditation Assessment Form

Attachment I: Financial Statements
(Name of Financial Institution:
(in Taka million)
2008
Shares
Growth
2009
Shares
Growth
2010
Shares
Growth Avg. Growth
Balance Sheet
Cash and cash equiv.
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Short-term liquid assets
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Loans (net)
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Other assets
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Total assets
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Deposits from customers
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Due to banks & FIs
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Other liabilities
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Total liabilities
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Share capital
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Other reserves
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Retained earnings
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Total equity
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Total liab. & equity
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Income Statement
Interest income
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Non-int. income
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Total revenue
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Net interest income
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Net non-interest income
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Total net income
(=operating income)
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Operating expenses
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Contingent risk expense
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Net non-operating income
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Profit bfr tax
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Net profit
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Operatinal Ratios
Capital adequacy (>10%)
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Liquidity
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Single borrower exp. (<20%)
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Forex exposure (<40%)
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Loan to deposit
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
NPL
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
RoE
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
RoA
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
Source:
Note: The fiscal year ends in

--- Page 62 ---
58

Annex 11: Monitoring Checklist (Annex-7 of ESRM Guidelines)
(Ref. Section 8.4)
Sl. No.
Question /Issues to check
Response
Project Summary Information
Reporting period covered by this monitoring report

Specification of project stage (design, construction, operation or
closure stage)

Key developments and any major changes in project location and
design, if any from the time of loan disbursement or from the last
supervision period.

General Information
Status of implementation of covenants/corrective action plan. Is it in
line with the agreed timeframe? (i.e.,if all covenants are
implemented or partially implemented or not implemented or
delayed implementation).
If partially implemented or not implemented or delayed
implementation, RO to please mention the reason in the response
column along with a timeline for completion of implementation as
committed by the client during supervision.

EHS Management
If there was any incidence of accidents, spills, leakages, explosion
etc. during the reporting period.
If yes, what was the scale of damage (e.g. if there was any fatality,
monetary loss etc.)?
What was the action taken in response to the incident?

If there were any recent fines or penalties issued by the regulatory
body.
If yes, RO to please mention the nature of violation, amount of
fine/penalty paid, action taken by the client to address the issue to
avoid any such fine/penalty in future.

If there was any health & safety incident.
If yes, what was the extent of injury – minor, major or fatal?
What was the action taken in response to the incident?

If there are any new E&S risks or adverse impacts observed due to
client‟s operation.

RO to please mention the types of new E&S risks, the reason for
such new E&S risks, mitigation measures undertaken by the client to

--- Page 63 ---
59


address the E&S risks.
Permits and Compliance Certificates
All the required permits, licenses and clearances in place.

RO to please mention the issuance dates and duration of validity of
all such permits, licenses and clearances.

10
Other international management systems (for e.g. ISO 14000,
OHSAS 18001, SA8000) followed by the client and if they have
valid certifications for those management systems?

Grievance Redressal
11
If there have been any recent complaints, grievance or protest
received from local communities.

If yes, RO to please specify the nature of grievances; actions taken
by the client to resolve grievances and if there any outstanding issues
and measures proposed by the client to resolve them.

12
If there were concerns raised during the stakeholder consultations
carried out by the client during the reporting period.

If yes, what was the approach undertaken by the client to address
those concerns?

Other Information
13
Any other information pertaining to environmental matters,
management approach, community, media or NGO coverage that
need to be mentioned.

If there are any environment friendly initiatives, energy saving
equipment etc. that might be relevant for the Bank/FI.

--- Page 64 ---
60




Annex 12. Outline of Annual Environmental and Social Monitoring Report (Ref. Section 8.4)


Name of
PFI
Number of
Sub-loans
Approved
Number of
Sub-loans
under
Monitoring
Total Sub-
loan amount
(000 US$)
Number of Sub-
loans under each
E&S Risk Category
Number of
Self
Reporting
by Sub-
borrowers
Number of
E&S Non-
compliances
Reported
by PFI
Number of
Resolved
E&S Non-
compliances
Reported by
PFI
Number of
E&S Non-
compliances
in BB’s
Sample
Review
Number of
Resolved E&S
Non-compliances
in BB’s Sample
Review
High
Medium

--- Page 65 ---
61

The report is prepared by:

Name of Officer ________________________________________

Position_______________________________________________

Reporting period _______________________________________


A. E&S Portfolio Review of AIIB fund during the reporting period

B. Training
Please provide information on capacity building activities/training conducted by BB during the reporting year

C. Grievance Redress Mechanism
Please provide summary of grievance log in the report period.

D. Additional information for the reporting period
1. Please provide details of any accidents/ litigation/complaints/regulatory notices and fines, their causes and corrective actions being taken.

2 Please state any difficulties related to the ESMS implementation by PFIs. What are the possible causes and actions being taken by PFIs?

--- Page 66 ---
60





Annex 13. Interim Un-audited Financial Report (Ref. Section 10.5, 10.6.1)

Table 1. Sources and Uses of Funds
Name/Number of Project
Sources and Uses of Funds
For the Period Ending ...............

Current Period
Cumulative
Forecast
RECEIPTS
Actual
Budgeted
Variance
Actual
Budgeted
Variance
Next 6 Months








AIIB







Advance







Reimbursement







Interest
Total Receipts (A)















LESS EXPENDITURES







PFI 1







PFI 2







PFI 3







PFI 4















Total Expenditures















RECEIPTS LESS
EXPENDITURES







Net Change in Cash
(A - B)















Foreign Exchange







62

--- Page 67 ---
63

Adjustment








CASH BALANCES







Opening Cash
Balances







Designated
Account







Project Operating
Account







Total Opening
Balance















Closing Cash
Balances







Designated
Account







Project Operating
Account







Total Closing
Balance

--- Page 68 ---
64

Table 2. Designated Account Reconciliation
DESIGNATED ACCOUNT RECONCILIATION STATEMENT
LOAN NUMBER ______________
ACCOUNT NUMBER ______________ WITH (BANK) __________________________
AS ON....................


US$
1 TOTAL ADVANCED BY AIIB

2 LESS: TOTAL AMOUNT DOCUMENTED BY AIIB

3 PRESENT OUTSTANDING AMOUNT ADVANCED TO THE DESIGNATED ACCOUNT (1 - 2)




4 BALANCE OF DESIGNATED ACCOUNT PER ATTACHED BANK RECONCILIATION AS OF DATE _________

5 BALANCE OF Project Operating ACCOUNT (BDT @ ........ per USD) PER ATTACHED BANK RECONCILIATION AS OF
DATE _________
6 PLUS: TOTAL AMOUNT TO BE DOCUMENTED IN THIS APPLICATION NO. _______________

7 PLUS: TOTAL AMOUNT WITHDRAWN AND NOT YET DOCUMENTED


REASON: _____________________________________________

8 PLUS: AMOUNTS CLAIMED IN PREVIOUS APPLICATIONS NOT YET CREDITED AT DATE OF BANK STATEMENTS


APPLICATION NO.
Amount


WA # XXX
XXXXX


WA # XX
XXXXX


SUBTOTAL OF PREVIOUS APPLICATIONS NOT YET CREDITED

9 LESS: INTEREST EARNED

10 TOTAL ADVANCE ACCOUNTED FOR (NO. 4 THROUGH NO. 9)

11 DIFFERENCE (3 - 10)




12 EXPLANATION OF ANY DIFFERENCE SHOWN IN LINE 11:




DATE: _______________________
SIGNATURE____________

TITLE: ______________

--- Page 69 ---
65


Table 3. Project Operating Account

PROJECT BANK ACCOUNT RECONCILIATION STATEMENT
LOAN NUMBER ______________
ACCOUNT NUMBER ______________ WITH (BANK) __________________________
AS ON ___________________________
S.N.
DESCRIPTION
AMOUNT IN BDT
AMOUNT TRANSFERRED FROM DESIGNATED ACCOUNT

ADD: INTEREST

TOTAL (1+2)

PAYMENT TO SUB-BORROWERS

CLOSING BALANCE (3-4)

CLOSING BALANCE AS PER BANK STATEMENT

DIFFERENCE (5-6)

EXPLANATION OF ANY DIFFERENCE SHOWN IN LINE 7:




DATE: __________________________
SIGNATURE:


TITLE:

--- Page 70 ---
66


Table 4. Revolving Fund Account
Revolving Fund Account (Principal Repayments)

Sub-loan
No.
Name of Sub-Borrower
or PFI
Borrowing
Date
Borrowing
Amount
Repayment
Date
Repayment
Amount
Repayment Amount is
Eligible for Financing
Other Sub-loans?
Accumulated
Amount Eligible
for Financing
Other Sub-loans






[Y/N - Specify reasons]









































































































































Note: In order for the Borrower to utilize the repayments made by the PFIs, total repayments from PFIs shall be more than USDXXXXXX
in aggregate.

--- Page 71 ---
67


Annex 14. Annual Financial Report (Ref. Section 10.6.2)

Table 1. Sources and Uses of Funds

Name/Number of Project
Sources and Uses of Funds
For the Period Ending ________________

Previous Period
Current Period
Cumulative
RECEIPTS
Actual
Budgeted
Actual
Budgeted
Actual
Budgeted







AIIB






Advance






Reimbursement






Interest
Total Receipts (A)













LESS EXPENDITURES






PFI 1






PFI 2






PFI 3






PFI 4













Total Expenditures (B)












RECEIPTS LESS EXPENDITURES






Net Change in Cash (A - B)













Foreign Exchange Adjustment













CASH BALANCES






Opening Cash Balances






Designated Account






Project Operating Account

--- Page 72 ---
68

Total Opening Balance













Closing Cash Balances






Designated Account






Project Operating Account






Total Closing Balance







Table 2. Designated Account Reconciliation

DESIGNATED ACCOUNT RECONCILIATION STATEMENT
LOAN NUMBER ______________
ACCOUNT NUMBER ______________ WITH (BANK) __________________________
AS ON _______________________


US$
TOTAL ADVANCED BY AIIB

LESS: TOTAL AMOUNT DOCUMENTED BY AIIB

PRESENT OUTSTANDING AMOUNT ADVANCED TO THE DESIGNATED ACCOUNT (1 - 2)




BALANCE OF DESIGNATED ACCOUNT PER ATTACHED BANK RECONCILIATION AS OF DATE _________

BALANCE OF PROJECT OPERATING ACCOUNT (BDT @ ..... perUSD) PER ATTACHED BANK RECONCILIATION AS OF DATE
PLUS: TOTAL AMOUNT TO BE DOCUMENTED IN THIS APPLICATION NO. _______________

PLUS: TOTAL AMOUNT WITHDRAWN AND NOT YET DOCUMENTED


REASON: _____________________________________________

PLUS: AMOUNTS CLAIMED IN PREVIOUS APPLICATIONS NOT YET CREDITED AT DATE OF BANK STATEMENTS


APPLICATION NO.
AMOUNT


WA # XXX
XXXX


WA # XXX
XXXX


SUBTOTAL OF PREVIOUS APPLICATIONS NOT YET CREDITED

LESS: INTEREST EARNED

10
TOTAL ADVANCE ACCOUNTED FOR (NO. 4 THROUGH NO. 9)
11
DIFFERENCE (3 - 10)




12
EXPLANATION OF ANY DIFFERENCE SHOWN IN LINE 11:

--- Page 73 ---
69









DATE: __________________________
SIGNATURE:

TITLE:








Table 3. Project Operating Account

PROJECT BANK ACCOUNT RECONCILIATION STATEMENT
LOAN NUMBER ______________
ACCOUNT NUMBER ______________ WITH (BANK) __________________________
AS ON _____________________________
S.N.
DESCRIPTION
AMOUNT IN BT
AMOUNT TRANSFERRED FROM DESIGNATED ACCOUNT

ADD: INTEREST

TOTAL (1+2)

PAYMENT TO SUB-BORROWERS

CLOSING BALANCE (3-4)

CLOSING BALANCE AS PER BANK STATEMENT

DIFFERENCE (5-6)

EXPLANATION OF ANY DIFFERENCE SHOWN IN LINE 7:




DATE: __________________________
SIGNATURE:


TITLE:

--- Page 74 ---
70

Table 4. Revolving Fund Account

Revolving Fund Account (Principal Repayments)
As on ___________________________
Sub-loan
No.
Name of Sub-Borrower
or PFI
Borrowing
Date
Borrowing
Amount
Repayment
Date
Repayment
Amount
Repayment Amount is
Eligible for Financing
Other Sub-loans?
Accumulated
Amount Eligible for
Financing Other Sub-
loans






[Y/N - Specify reasons]









































































































































Note: In order for the Borrower to utilize the repayments made by the PFIs, total repayments from PFIs shall be more than USDXXXXXX
in aggregate.

--- Page 75 ---
71

Annex 15. Statement of Expenditure Form for PFI (Ref. Section 10.5, 10.6.1.2)

Name/Number of Project
Statement of Expenditure
For the Period Ending ________________


Address of
PFI
Currency and
Amount
Date of Payment
Exchange Rate
( %) Co-financier's Share
(USD)
( %) AIIB
Share (USD)
( %) Borrower's Share
(USD)































































Supporting documents for this SOE are retained at
1. A separate SOE form should be used for retroactive financing.
2. A separate SOE form should be used for each category.

--- Page 76 ---
72




Annex 16 (PIU to AIIB):
COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response Facility Project (CECRFP)
AIIB Loan No. L0415-A
Summary Report of On-going Sub-project
Quarter: ………….
Sl.
No.
PFI Name
Loan
Disbursed
by PFIs
during this
Quarter
(BDT)
Refinancing
from
CECRFP
(BDT)
Outstanding
Amount at
the end of
Reporting
Quarter
(BDT)
% of
Classified
Loan of
Column
Cumulative
Outstanding
at the end of
Quarter
Cumulative
NPA (% of
Classified
Loan of
Column 7)
Number
of Loan
A/C (Sub-
borrower)
Number of
Beneficiaries
10
Total

--- Page 77 ---
73



Annex 17 (PIU to AIIB):
COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response Facility Project (CECRFP)
AIIB Loan No. L0415-A
Quarterly Progress Report
Quarter: ……………….
A. Sector wise Progress
Sl.
No.
PFI
Name
Refinancing from CECRFP (BDT)
Number of
Loan A/C
(Sub-
borrower)
Number of
Sub-
borrowers
with Female
Owner/
Director
Number of Beneficiaries
(Only Employees/Workers)
Remark
Cottage
Micro
Small
Medium
Total
Mal
Female
Total
10
11
12
13
Total













B. Report on Project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism

Sl.
No.
PFI Name
Refinancing from
CECRFP (BDT)
Number of Loan A/C
(Sub-borrower)
Number of
Complaints
Received
Number of
Complaints
Informed to
FICSD
Number of
Complaints
Resolved
Remarks

Total

--- Page 78 ---
60



Annex 18-A (PFI to PIU):
Quarterly Progress Report
under
QTR_PFI_AIIB-I
COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response Facility Project (CECRFP)
Name of PFI: _______________________________________
Cell Phone Number:_____________________
Name of Reporting Officer: ___________________________
Office Phone Number:____________________
Designation: ______________________________________
Email Address:_________________________
ID Number: ____________________________________
Reporting period: …… to ……


A. Report on Loans/ Investments
Sector
Sub-sector
Refinancin
g Received
from
CECRFP
(BDT)
Outstanding
Amount at
the end of
Quarter
(BDT)
% of
Classified
Loan
Amount
of
Column 4
Cumulative
Outstanding
Amount at
the end of
Quarter
(BDT)
Cumulative
NPA (% of
Classified
Loan of
Column 6)
No. of
Loan A/C
(Sub-
borrower)
Number of Sub-
borrowers with
Female
Owner/Director
Information of Beneficiaries
Number of
Owners/Directors
Number of Employees/
Workers
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
10
11
12
13
14
15
Cottage
Manufacturing













Service













Trade













Sub-total (A)













Micro
Manufacturing













Service













Trade













Sub-total (B)













Small
Manufacturing













Service













Trade













Sub-total (C)













Mediu
Manufacturing













Service













Sub-total (D)













Total (A+B+C+D)














B. Report on Project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism
Serial
No.
Particulars

Number
Amount
Remarks
Complaints received during this quarter regarding CECRFP Refinancing




Complaints Informed to FICSD




Complaints Resolved




74

--- Page 79 ---
75


Authorized Signature with Seal: ________________________
Cell Phone No.: ______________________________________


Annex 18-B (PFI to PIU):
Quarterly Report on On-going Sub-Project Summary
under
QTR_PFI_AIIB-II
COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response Facility Project (CECRFP)
(Period Covered: From …… to ……)
Name of PFI: ____________________________
Sl
No
Name of
Sub-
borrowe
r and
Loan ID
No.
CECRFP
Refinanc
Referenc
e No.
PFI
Branc
Name
Sub-
borrowe
Business
Location
Type of
Entrepreneu
r (M/F)
Type of
Business
(Manufacturi
ng/ Service/
Trade)
Sector of
Business
(Cottage/
Micro/
Small/
Medium)
Disbursem
ent
Amount
Date of
Disbursem
ent
Rate of
Interest
Maturity
Date
CECRFP
Refinanci
ng
Amount
Outstandin
g Amount
at the end
of Quarter
Information on Beneficiaries
Number of Owner/
Director
Number of
Employees/
Worker
F** Total
Total
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20











































































































































































10







































M* = Male F** = Female






Authorized Signature with Seal: ________
Cell Phone No.: ____________________

--- Page 80 ---
76


Annex 19 (PFI to PIU):
Quarterly Monitoring Report on E&S Risk Categorization, ESDD and E&S Monitoring
under
QTR_PFI_AIIB-III
COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response Facility Project (CECRFP)
Name of PFI: _______________________________
Cell Phone Number: _________________________
Name of Reporting Officer: ___________________
Office Phone Number:________________________
Designation: ______________________________
Email Address: _____________________________
ID Number: ___________________________________
Reporting period: ….. to …..
Table 1: Quarterly Monitoring Report on E&S Risk Categorization and ESDD
Loan
Disbursed
(BDT)
Refinance
Received from
CECRFP
(BDT) [50% of
Column 1]
Number of
Loan A/C
(Sub-
borrower)
Number of Loan A/C for which
ESDD was Performed*
Number of
ES Action
Plan
Prepared
Remarks
(If any)
Low
Risk
Medium
Risk
High
Risk
Total









*Note: E&S risk categorization and ESDD for Medium and High risk along with the Corrective Action Plans should be attached with the report.
Table 2: Quarterly Monitoring Report on E&S Monitoring
Loan
Disbursed
(BDT)
Refinance
Received from
CECRFP
(BDT) [50% of
Column 1]
Number of
Loan A/C
(Sub-
borrower)
Number of Loan A/C for which
ESDD was Performed*
Number of
Self
Reporting
by Sub-
borrowers
Number of
E&S Non-
complianc
es
Identified
by PFI
Number
of E&S
Non-
complianc
es
Resolved
Loan
Amount
of
Column
(BDT)
Number of
Loan A/C
Monitored as
per Annex-7
of ESRM
Guidelines
[No less than
20% of
Column 7]**
Loan
Amount
of
Column
12
(BDT)
Remarks
(If any)
Low
Risk
Medium
Risk
High
Risk
Total
10
11
12
13
14














*Note: E&S risk categorization and ESDD for Medium and High risk along with the updated Corrective Action Plans should be attached with the report.
**Note:Relevant monitoring checkelists should be attached with the report.




Authorized Signature with Seal: _________________________
Cell Phone No.: ______________________________________