--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd
FE Circular No. 32 Date: August 09, 2020

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Deposit products for Non-Resident Bangladeshis (NRBs) working abroad

Inward remittances sent by wage earners is well accommodated in the existing foreign exchange
regulatory framework. Bangladesh Bank has simplified its regulations to facilitate inward wage
remittances through banking channel. As a part of the program, remittance channel through exchange
houses abroad has been developed. Under the program, Authorized Dealers (ADs) can establish
drawing arrangements with overseas exchange houses. Moreover, massive financial inclusion program
of Bangladesh Bank is strengthening nationwide distribution networks of inward remittances.

02. The existing regulations allow NRBs to maintain foreign currency accounts and non-
resident taka accounts in Bangladesh. They are also allowed to make direct and portfolio investment
in Bangladesh, including investment in saving instruments of Government in the form of time
deposits. To encourage NRBs in saving their hard earned income in Bangladesh, it has been decided
that ADs can introduce deposit products in taka for NRBs. The guidance note for the products is as
follows:
(a) The deposit accounts in the name of NRBs may be opened in the form of savings for a
period of one year and above. The accounts may also be opened without initial installment for the
persons proceeding abroad for employment.
(b) Non-AD bank branches providing remittance delivery services can also maintain the
accounts.
(c) The deposits in the accounts shall be either monthly or quarterly.
(d) The accounts shall be credited in taka after conversion of foreign currency: (i) out of wage
remittance channeled through banks or exchange houses abroad, (ii) foreign currency tendered by
account holder himself while on temporary visit to Bangladesh subject to production of FMJ Form for
currency in case of exceeding permissible limit and (iii) transfer from foreign currency accounts of
the account holders.
(e) Interest/profit of the deposit products shall be commercially competitive as per market trend.
Being the source of deposit is foreign currency, ADs may encourage NRBs with incentive in
interest/profit.

continued to page no-2

--- Page 2 ---
(f) Taka loans to such deposit product holder for meeting his personal requirements in
Bangladesh may be granted keeping the deposit accounts as lien, subject to adherence to usual
lending norms.
(g) During the tenor of deposit product, if the deposit product holder returns to Bangladesh
permanently, the deposit products may continue to be maintained with deposits from local sources
subject to conversion of the products into same type of products available to residents and necessary
adjustment of interest/profits or installment size, if any, as per agreement.
(h) On maturity, based on option of the deposit product holder, ADs may pay the proceeds of
the deposits including interest/profit to the beneficiaries/nominees of the product or may be credited
to interest/profit bearing fixed deposit accounts opened in their names. In case of NRBs residing in
Bangladesh permanently after their return, the proceeds can be made available to them either in one
time settlement or pension type monthly/quarterly settlement.

03. Bangladesh Bank may consider applications of non-residents to repatriate payments abroad
from the balances held in the deposit products on maturity/before maturity to meet subsistence
expense. In submitting the applications to Bangladesh Bank, ADs shall observe the following
instructions:
(a) Applications for remittances shall be made with full documentary evidences in support of the
requirements.
(b) The nationality of the applicants shall be stated and if the applicant is not a resident in
Bangladesh, the country of residence of the applicant shall be clearly stated. If the applicant is a
dual national, the period of residence in Bangladesh (if any) shall be declared.

04. As usual ADs shall observe account opening/maintaining procedures/regulations including
KYC and AML/CFT standards and applicable taxes/levies at source on interests/profits.

05. ADs shall display the deposit products in their websites with full disclosure of their
features. They shall also intimate the launching of such products to Foreign Exchange Policy
Department of Bangladesh Bank, Head Office.

Please inform the contents of this circular to all your concerned constituents.


Yours faithfully,


(Mohammad Khurshid Wahab)
General Manager
Phone: 9530123