--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd
FE Circular No. 31







Date: July 26, 2020

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Outward remittances on account of shipment tracking charges

Please refer to paragraph 32(b) and 32(c), chapter 10 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions-2018 (GFET), Vol-1 in terms of which Authorized Dealers (ADs) may remit their own
subscriptions to international financial news/transactions service providers. Paragraph 34 ibid also
permits ADs to remit their charges payable to foreign banks. In the context of international trade, ADs
support importers and exporters to execute the transactions for which they need to avail shipment
tracking services from global service providers to be satisfied with the underlying transactions.

02. To facilitate payment against such services, it has been decided that ADs may effect
remittances on account of shipment tracking charges; subject to observance of the following
instructions:
a) ADs shall have tie-up arrangements with globally recognized shipment tracking service
providers;

b) ADs shall receive shipment tracking information through secure communication
channels/automatic system generated paths;

c) Remittance requests from service providers abroad shall be supported by invoices;

d) Regulations regarding payment of tax at source, value added taxes and other levies
applicable on the payments need to be complied with.

03. To economize transaction costs, ADs may establish tie-up arrangements with other ADs
having arrangements with shipment tracking service providers abroad, for receiving the particular
services. Payments between them will be settled in Taka. Service providing ADs may remit, in
accordance with 2 above, the payments abroad payable against the services rendered to other ADs.

As usual, ADs shall observe due diligence regarding AML/CFT standards, reporting routine to
Bangladesh Bank and so on.


Yours faithfully,

(Mohammad Khurshid Wahab)
General Manager
Phone: 9530123