--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd


FE Circular No. 19






Date: May 20, 2025

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Remittance on account of correspondence courses

In order to facilitate development of professional skills, it has been decided that
Authorized Dealers (ADs) may effect remittances on account of correspondence courses/distant
certification courses to be paid by students to foreign professional/educational institutions for
appearing in professional examinations. In this context, ADs shall examine the following
documents:

(a) TM Form signed by applicants supported by a declaration as per Annex-A;
(b) Demand note/invoice/examination fee notice, etc.

02. The remittances are to be effected in the name of the foreign institutions abroad,
subject to deduction of applicable taxes.
03. The facility shall be admissible for one correspondence course at a time.
04. For each release of foreign exchange subsequent to the first release, the current
progress report needs be taken into consideration.
05. ADs may execute the remittances through card channels in terms of FE Circular
Letter No. 18 of May 04, 2025.
06. All purchases of foreign exchange throughout the entire duration of a correspondence
course should be from one AD bank branch. ADs shall maintain separate file for each student
with all relevant papers in readiness for perusal by inspection team of Bangladesh Bank.

Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of your relevant constituents.


Yours faithfully,

(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123

--- Page 2 ---
Annex-A


Application for payment of fees for correspondence course


1. Name of the applicant:
2. Address of the applicant:
3. Educational qualifications of the applicant:
4. Present occupation of the applicant:
5. Description of the course:
6. Duration of the course:
7. Reasons for selecting the course:
8. Total estimated fees for the course:
9. Remittance made earlier:
10. Progress report of earlier examinations:
11. Amount of fees applied for:

I do hereby declare that the information stated above is true and I am not pursuing
correspondence courses other than …………………… (Name of the course). I have not
remitted/shall not remit fees through other AD banks for the course.


Signature
Name:
Date: