--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd
FE Circular No. 40 Date: September 24, 2020

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Use of international cards for travels outside Bangladesh
Chapter 19 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions-2018 (GFET), Vol-1
outlines operational procedures in issuance of international cards against relevant entitlements and
payments/online payments thereby for legitimate purposes under current account transactions.
International cards are, in general, intended to be used by Bangladeshi cardholders while on travel
abroad. General permission is, however, given to use international cards in Bangladesh for online
payments as specified in the above stated chapter. International cards are useable for online purchase
of air tickets by cardholders while on travel between destinations outside Bangladesh (such as New
York to Philadelphia or Singapore to Kuala Lumpur or like). But online purchase of air tickets for
such destinations through international cards cannot be used by travelers before proceeding abroad.

02. In view of the growing demand to purchase air tickets by travelers before proceeding
abroad for subsequent air travels between destinations outside Bangladesh, it has been decided that
international cards may be used for online purchase of air tickets by cardholders having visa, where
applicable, for travels of such destinations outside Bangladesh. Bangladeshi travel operators may
also provide such ticketing services to travelers for movements between destinations outside
Bangladesh against payments by international cards. In this context, Authorized Dealers (ADs) shall,
under merchant agreements, provide acquiring services to travel operators in Bangladesh for
capturing online payments settled through international cards against sales of air tickets for above
stated travels. Travel operators shall, having relevant registrations/permissions/licenses including
membership with trade association representing the sector, have tie-up arrangements with
internationally recognized travel operators/airlines. Acquiring services by ADs may also be
applicable for capturing payments against such sales to foreign nationals/non-residents residing
abroad or in Bangladesh. The payments so captured by ADs shall be retained in margin accounts of
travel operators. Utilization of balances retained in margin accounts shall be guided by the following
instructions:
(a) Periodical remittances to counterparts abroad, net of agreed upon reasonable service
charges/ commissions;
(b) Refund to travelers in case of cancellation of travel;
(c) Encashment of service charges/commissions;
(d) Deduction and payment of applicable taxes thereon.
Cont’d to page - 02

--- Page 2 ---
-02-

03. Remittance requests by travel operators to ADs shall be supported by invoices and
statements stating sales of air tickets, cancellation of travels, utilization of air tickets, payment of
applicable taxes, if any, etc., and reconciliation thereof to arrive at payable amount. ADs shall
preserve documents for 5 years for onsite inspection by Bangladesh Bank.
04. Subject to observance of the above instructions, hotel booking and purchase of railway/
ship/bus tickets for travel between destinations outside Bangladesh may be arranged by travel
operators for which ADs may provide services of receiving payment in margin accounts and settling
dues payable to counterparts abroad.
05. As usual, ADs shall adhere to KYC and AML/CFT standards with regards to the
transactions.
06. Tour operators desirous to provide the services shall, through their ADs, intimate to
Foreign Exchange Policy Department at Bangladesh Bank, Head office of their agreements/
arrangements with international travel operators made in line with this circular before one month of
commencing business.

Please bring the above instructions, effective immediately, to the notice of your concerned
clientele.

Yours faithfully,


(Mohammad Khurshid Wahab)
General Manager
Phone: 9530123