--- Page 1 ---
website: www.bangladesh-bank.org
www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

Department of Financial Institutions and Markets
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
DFIM Circular No.-06

Date: 05 Bhadro 1420

20 August 2013

Chief Executives/Managing Directors,
All Financial Institutions in Bangladesh.

Dear Sir,
Guidelines on the Base Rate System
for Non-Bank Financial Institutions.

Non-Bank Financial Institutions (NBFIs) in Bangladesh have achieved
impressive growth in recent years reflecting the process of financial innovation and
holding the promise of deepening financial intermediation in long term financing
needs. In the process of ensuring corporate governance and sustainable development
of this emerging financial sector, Bangladesh Bank (BB) extended its policy support in
the risk management culture through adoption of the best practices on prudential
regulations, Basel accord implementation, Stress testing model. A new inclusion in
this endeavor is the Base Rate System. In this regard, BB hereby issues the
“Guidelines on the Base Rate System for Non-Bank Financial Institutions”.
Pricing of financial products like loans, leases and other services is a critical issue
as many approaches are available and they capture different aspects. Base rate is the
minimum rate below which it is not viable for an NBFI to lend in the market. Base
rate system promotes transparency in product pricing and encourages healthy
competition in the economy. Cost of Funds Index (CoFI) is another vital start
pioneering the price-setting mechanism in the industry. This index will track
movement of cost data in the NBFI industry and will serve as the reference rate for
floating rate loan/lease products. The Base Rate System aims at ensuring corporate
governance and market efficiency in the financial sector of the country. The guidelines
provide a framework for the components, computation mechanism, reporting formats
and prudential regulations on the Base Rate System.
Henceforth, NBFIs have to compute their Base rate as per instructions in the
guidelines on monthly basis and submit statements to the Department of Financial
Institutions and Markets of Bangladesh Bank within 10(ten) days of the following
month. For initial preparation of the CoFI, NBFIs have to submit monthly report
starting from December 2012 on or before 15 September 2013.
The “Guidelines on the Base Rate System for Non-Bank Financial Institutions”
and the Excel based “Reporting Format” are available on the website of Bangladesh
Bank for all concerned.
Please acknowledge the receipt.
Yours Sincerely,



(Mahbuba Khatun)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 9530145