--- Page 1 ---
Department of Financial Institutions & Markets
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office, Dhaka

DFIM Circular No. : 10
Date:
20 October, 2015
05 Kartik,1422
Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Financial Institutions in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,

Providing Revolving Loans by Financial Institutions (FIs)
It has been observed from the analysis of loan statements of FIs submitted to Bangladesh
Bank that, some FIs are providing revolving loans for one year with condition of interest
repayment on monthly basis and the principal amount at the end of tenure. As per the loan
contracts, these kinds of loans are renewable after the end of the tenure. It has been identified
by recent on-site and off-site supervision of Bangladesh Bank that FIs renew this type of
loans by showing them regular despite of the clients’ failure to adjust the outstanding amount
at the end of the tenure.
Moreover, being failure to recover these loans at the end of the tenure, some FIs have been
renewing these loan accounts for the next tenure by considering the outstanding amount as
new loan limit. Though these loans are classifiable under qualitative judgement, FIs are
showing these as regular. Thus it has been generating credit risk in one hand and hampering
transparency and accountability of the institution on the other hand. Besides these, the true
picture of loan classification status is not being reflected in the financial statements. As a
whole, the FIs are falling in greater risks gradually due to the lack of transparency in loan
approval and renewal process.
Under these circumstances, in order to ensure the factual reflection of the classified loans and
to reduce the risk of nonpayment, it has been decided that, FIs will not renew any revolving
loan account without adjusting its overdue amount.


The DFIM Circular No.02, dated: July 02, 2014 will be treated as void.

The instructions of this circular will be in effect immediately.
Yours sincerely,

(Md. Shah Alam)
General Manager
Phone: 9530178