--- Page 1 ---
Department of Financial Institutions andMarkets
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka-1000


DFIM Circular No. 09


Date:

Chief Executives/ Managing Directors
All Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Regarding Submission of Liquidity Profile and Statement of Affairs
“Managing Core Risks in Financial Institutions: Asset Liability Management” issued by
Bangladesh Bank dated July 14, 2005 provides standard guidelines and tools to the management
for assessing and monitoring the liquidity position of a financial institution (FI). The guidelines
also contains adequate instructions regarding measuring and managing the net funding
requirement. Hence, FIs are instructed to submit statement of Liquidity Profile and Statement of
Affairs as per following instructions:
Statement of Liquidity Profile:
1. FIs shall submit projected Liquidity Profile to this department on a monthly basis, prepared
as of the last working day of each month within 7 (seven) working days of the following
month. Instructions given below shall be followed in preparing the statement:
a) Considering the statement as the Aging Gap Analysis of assets and liabilities, in the
‘Projected Figure’ column, FIs shall separately report the outflows and inflows against
each assets and liabilities items without netting by placing all inflows and outflows in
appropriate time buckets according to the expected timing of flows.
b) Contingent liabilities and assets should be reported in appropriate time buckets while
inserting the off-balance sheet items in the statement.
c) The items in the “Actual Figure” column should not be netted off. FIs shall report the
outflows and inflows separately in the “Outflows” and “Inflows” columns respectively.
2. From November, 2015 FIs shall submit online Liquidity Profile statement through the web
portal of Bangladesh Bank as follows:

October 20, 2015
Kartik 05, 1422
Website: www.bb.org.bd
Page-1/2

--- Page 2 ---
a) FIs shall log into the relevant BB web portal (http://ereturns.bb.org.bd/edwportal) using
authorised User ID and download the T_PS_M_LIQDTY_FI template (with User
Manual) and reference file. The Template and reference file should be kept in the same
folder while filling in the template. ‘Macro’ and ‘Link’ options should be enabled before
starting inputting the data;
b) Taka amounts should be expressed in whole numbers; Rounding of numbers to
thousands/lacs/crores shall not be accepted;
c) After filling in the template, the authorised user shall save it and click the ‘Convert to
CSV’ button in order to create a CSV file. That particular CSV file shall be uploaded to
the BB web portal;
d) Hard copies of the Statements for the months of October/2015, November/2015, and
December/2015 shall be submitted to this department with forwarding in parallel to the
online submission in BB web portal. Hereafter, FIs need not submit hard copy of the
statement;
e) In order to endorse the authenticity of information provided in the statement, FIs shall
upload input templates in BB web portal after obtaining approval from Managing
Director or his/her nominated/authorised officer;
f) Actions will be taken as per DFIM Circular No. 05/2011 in case of failure to upload the
input template properly in BB web portal within the stipulated time.
Statement of Affairs
FIs shall submit hard copy and soft copy through e-mail (gm.dfim@bb.org.bd) of Statement of
Affairs to this department with forwarding on a quarterly basis within 15 days after the end of
the respective quarter.
Other applicable instructions mentioned in the “Managing Core Risks in Financial Institutions:
Asset Liability Management” shall remain unchanged.
DFIM Circular No. 06 dated July 26, 2011 and the subsequent DFIM Circular Letter Nos. 16 and
21 dated October 24, 2011 and December 20, 2011 respectively, issued with reference to the
aforementioned subject are hereby declared cancelled.
This circular is issued with the authority vested under Section 18(chha) of Financial Institutions
Act, 1993.
Sincerely yours,



(Md. Shah Alam)
General Manager
Phone: 9530178
Page-2/2