--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 16 Date: April 24, 2025

All Authorized Dealer in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Mobile operators’ receipt of roaming bills in Taka and
corresponding outward remittances

In terms of paragraph 18, chapter 19 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions-2018, Vol.-1, international cards are allowed to be used for payments of mobile
phone roaming service utilization bills to mobile operators in Bangladesh.

02. To make roaming services easier by resident Bangladeshi travelers, it has been
decided that mobile operators in Bangladesh can accept payments from a customer in Taka; up
to a maximum of 6,000 Taka per trip and 30,000 Taka over a calendar year. Mobile operators
shall follow the following instructions while activating roaming services:
1. The above mentioned limit cannot be exceeded in aggregate for use of more than
one mobile number/operator;
2. The traveler shall have valid visa, if applicable, and ticket;
3. Roaming services should be activated one week before the journey.

03. Regarding payments to network operators abroad, Authorized Dealers (ADs) may
make outward remittances in observance of the following instructions:

(a) ADs shall obtain applications containing-
(i) Copy of agreements;
(ii) Copy of invoices;
(iii) Documentary evidences related to the payment of all applicable taxes.


(b) ADs shall obtain separate statements showing earnings by customers with

detailed information (mobile number, NID, passport number) and overseas

payables thereon.


(c) An undertaking from the mobile operator to the effect that they have allowed

roaming services in Taka to their customers up to the limit set by Bangladesh

Bank.

Continued to page no. 2

--- Page 2 ---
04. After scrutinizing the application along with the supporting documents submitted and
establishing the bonafides, ADs shall remit the payments. In this case, ADs shall utilize first
foreign currency fund, if any, in their admissible foreign currency accounts and the remainder
from Taka accounts.


05. Remittances under the authorization of this circular may only be made through a
designated AD branch with intimation to Bangladesh Bank, concerned department/concerned
area office of Bangladesh Bank.


Please bring the contents of this circular letter to the notice of all concerned.


Yours faithfully,


(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123