--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular Letter No. 02 Date: January 19, 2025

Head offices/principal offices of all
Authorized Dealers in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Wage Remittance: Amendment of Drawing Arrangement and Security Deposit.

Please refer to paragraph 4, appendix 6/2 of Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions-2018 (GFET) Vol.1 regarding security deposit requirements for exchange
houses with Authorized Dealers (ADs) in Bangladesh.

02. To cope up with the changing situation, necessary amendments required in the
provisions of drawing arrangement framework are outlined below:

(a) AD banks are allowed to perform drawing arrangements with exchange houses
abroad in three modalities: (i) Draft Drawing (ii) EFT (iii) Pin-Code. „EFT‟ and „Pin-Code‟
shall be referred to as “Pre-Fund” and “Post-Fund” modalities respectively and these will be
renamed accordingly.

(b) „Draft Drawing‟ modality as described in paragraph 4 (i), appendix 6/2 of GFET
shall stand revoked. AD banks are instructed to communicate with their foreign counterparts
having drawing arrangements under this modality and convert it to “Pre-Fund” modality upon
complying with existing regulations.

(c) The security deposit and minimum balance requirements for „Pre-Fund‟ modality
as described in paragraph 4(ii), appendix 6/2 of GFET shall be withdrawn. AD banks are
instructed to communicate with their foreign counterparts having drawing arrangements
under such modality to adjust the security deposit maintained in Non Resident Foreign
Currency (NRFC) accounts through remittance disbursement.

(d) The minimum balance requirement in Non Resident Taka (NRT) account for „Post
Fund‟ modality as described in paragraph 4(iii), appendix 6/2 of GFET shall be Tk 2.00
million instead of „Equivalent Taka of USD 25,000.00‟. AD banks are advised to apply
prevailing exchange rate on the date of minimum balance received in foreign currency for the
necessary conversion. Security deposit requirement in NRFC account under this modality
shall remain unchanged.

(e) For delivery of remittances under `Post-Fund‟ modality, AD banks shall take
reimbursement against their Taka disbursement in equivalent foreign currency, converted by
prevailing exchange rate, from their respective foreign counterparts within the time frame as
per underlying tie-ups not more than T+2 days.

ADs are advised to bring the contents of this circular letter, effective from February
01, 2025, to the notice of their foreign counterparts having drawing arrangements and update
their operational procedures as needed.


Yours Faithfully,

Monoar Uddin Ahmed
Director (FEPD)
Phone: +8802-9530119