--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd


FE Circular No. 03




Date: January 12, 2025

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Remittances on account of fees for banking services and capital market intermediaries.

Please refer to paragraphs 32(b) and 32(c), chapter 10 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions-2018 (GFET), Vol-1 in terms of which Authorized Dealers (ADs) are allowed to make
remittances on account of their own subscription for services related to Reuters monitor and SWIFT.
This is to clarify that the above facility will also be applicable to ADs for availing recurring services
required for day-to-day international transactions, without limiting to Reuters monitor, SWIFT,
Bloomberg, bankers almanac, due diligence repository services, credit rating services, price
verification services and so on. It has also been decided that ADs may allow remittances on account of
payments related to lounge visit facilities availed by their customers-travelers holding international
cards, subject to the ceiling in aggregate not exceeding 500 US Dollar or equivalent per cardholder in
a calendar year.

02. To facilitate smooth functioning of capital market transactions, it has been decided that ADs
may remit fees abroad on account of services relating to financial data and communication services
such as Reuters monitor, Bloomberg etc. In this context, ADs need to be ensured that applicants -
brokerage firms, merchant banks, asset management company, etc. are duly licensed by Bangladesh
Securities Exchange Commission.

03. In all cases of effecting remittances, ADs shall obtain invoices and other relevant
documents and comply with regulations relating to payments of applicable taxes, VAT, etc.

04. As usual, AD shall follow reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank and conduct customer’s
due diligence with regards to AML/CFT standards.

Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of your concerned constituents.


Yours faithfully,


(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123