--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd
FE Circular No. 06






Date: January 14, 2025

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Inland letters of credit (LCs) in foreign currencies– simplification of operational modalities


Authorized Dealers (ADs) are permitted to establish inland back to back LCs and other
admissible LCs in foreign currencies in terms of chapter 7 of the Guidelines for Foreign
Exchange Transactions-2018, Vol-1 (GFET) and other relevant circulars. Operations of inland
LCs in foreign currencies are guided by UCP in force and other international standards,
including regulatory instructions issued from time to time by Bangladesh Bank.

02. It is observed that permissible domestic trade in foreign currencies faces bottlenecks
due to various clauses embedded in LCs. These clauses are often difficult to be met within the
validity of LCs. Examples include requirements of delivery challans to be signed by top officials
of LC applicants, acceptance of documents by applicants before these are submitted to
beneficiaries’ ADs, etc. Domestic sellers frequently encounter financial difficulties due to
prolonged processing time. Despite the significant volume of transactions, domestic trade
activities, including financing by ADs, remain sluggish and lack vibrancy.

03. To bring ease in domestic trade, ADs are advised to establish operational modalities
that can simplify domestic trade transactions in foreign currencies. In addition, ADs need to
observe following instructions:

For LC issuing ADs:

(a) ADs shall avoid to incorporate conditions in LCs which cannot be maintained during
the validity of respective LCs.
(b) In case of unusual conditions to be imposed by LC applicants, ADs shall examine if
such items are available in purchases or sales contracts/proforma invoices.
(c) On receipt of documents for payment/acceptance, ADs shall conduct usual formalities
for examining them, and making payments or acceptance, whichever is required; in no way, they
shall forward the same documents to LC applicants for examination and their acceptance.

For LC advising/nominated ADs:

(a) ADs should examine clauses contained in respective LCs received from LC issuing
banks and advise the same to beneficiaries.
Cont’d to Page-2

--- Page 2 ---
(b) On receipt of documents from beneficiaries, ADs shall examine the documents and
forward the same for payment/collection to LC issuing ADs.

04. Transactional framework for inland trade need to be brought under electronic
platform. Accordingly, ADs should introduce electronic options with regard to communication
relating to LCs such as transmission, advising, presentation, acceptances and all subsequent
communication under mutually agreed systems with counterparts. ADs shall have safe and
secure electronic systems, duly approved by the Board of Directors (competent management
team in case of foreign banks), compliant with the Guideline on ICT Security in force.

05. ADs shall report the information including acceptances to Bangladesh Bank online
reporting system in accordance with reporting routine, inter alia.

You are advised to bring the above instructions to the notice of your all AD branches and
central processing center for their meticulous compliance.



Yours faithfully,

(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123