--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 31






Date: July 31, 2025

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Foreign exchange regulations - export trade transactions

Foreign exchange transactions on export of goods and services are regulated by the
Foreign Exchange Regulation (FER) Act, 1947 and subsequent circulars issued there against. To
bring ease in conducting export transactions, the existing regulations compiled at one place with
modifications as necessitated are attached herewith. Existing instructions regarding export
transactions available in the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions-2018 (GFET), Vol.-1
and its subsequent circulars shall stand repealed with issuance of this circular excepting monthly
reporting instructions contained in GFET, Vol.-2.


02. This circular is issued with the authority vested to Bangladesh Bank under Section
20(3) of the FER Act, 1947.

03. The instructions of this circular will remain valid for one year from the date of its
issuance. However, instructions to be issued within this period will be read with this circular.

Please bring the instructions to the notice of your constituents.




Encl. As stated.

Yours faithfully,


(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123

--- Page 2 ---
Foreign exchange regulations - export trade transactions
CONTENTS
Part-A: GENERAL GUIDELINES
Page No
Introduction
Foreign exchange regulations
International trade rules
Registration of exporters
Declaration and repatriation of proceeds
Prescribed form for declaring exports
Export exempted from declaration and repatriation of export proceeds
Prescribed period to realize export proceeds
Method of receiving payments against exports
10
Retention of export proceeds in foreign currency accounts
11
EXP Forms
12
Electronic EXP Form
13
Export transactions and proceeds realization guidelines for ADs
14
Making out and delivery of shipping documents
15
Endorsement of shipping documents by the ADs
16
Dispatch of export documents
17
Negotiation of export documents by using shipping documents issued by
freight forwarders
18
Disposal of EXP Form

--- Page 3 ---
ii

Part-A: GENERAL GUIDELINES
Page No
19
Deductable charges
20
Use of appropriate incoterms
21
Receipts of advance remittances against exports
22
Short shipments and shipments shut out entirely
23
Shipments lost or damaged in transit
24
Shipments on FOB basis
10
25
Reporting of overdue cases
10
26
Online reporting
10
27
Export proceed realization certificate against direct and deemed exports
10
28
Discounting of direct and deemed export bills in foreign exchange
10
29
Right to assignment of export bills
11
30
Insurance coverage against financing to exporters
11

Part-B: EXPORT FROM THE SPECIALIZED ZONES
Page No
31
Principles and procedures
12
32
Declaration of export
12
33
Disposal of export proceeds
12
34
Discounting of accepted usance bills of specialized zones’ enterprise (Type
A and B)
12
35
Sale of Bangladeshi goods to enterprises in specialized zones
12

--- Page 4 ---
iii

Part-C: EXPORT TRADE TRANSACTIONS, APPROPRIATE SAFEGUARDS
Page No
36
Regulations for cross-border banking and AML/CFT compliance
14
37
Safeguards for export trade transactions
14
38
Guidance for exporters in case of transaction issues
15

Part-D: EXPORT UNDER OPEN ACCOUNT CREDIT TERMS
Page No
39
Open account credit terms for exports
16
40
Financing and payment terms
16
41
Competitive export pricing
16
42
Counterparty arrangements and membership requirements
16
43
Issuance and handling of transport documents
17
44
Timeline for submission of export documents
17
45
Early payment facilities for exporters
17
46
Assignment of export proceeds
17
47
Verification of export and compliance with KYC/AML standards
17
48
Consultation on international factoring guidelines
17

Part-E: EXPORT OF SERVICES INCLUDING INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY ENABLED SERVICES
Page No
49
Export of software and data entry/ processing services
18
50
Business process outsourcing
18
51
Business services
19

--- Page 5 ---
iv

Part-E: EXPORT OF SERVICES INCLUDING INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY ENABLED SERVICES
Page No
52
Time limit for repatriation of export earnings
19
53
Export proceeds and retention abroad
19

Part-F: EXPORT PROCEED REALIZATION SERVICES
Page No
54
Acquiring services
20
55
Repatriation of proceeds against export traded under E-Commerce
20
56
Repatriation of export proceeds through OPGSPs
20
57
Repatriation of ICT related service income through international card
22
58
Repatriation of export proceeds through payment service providers
22
59
Repatriation of income from IT related services through MFSPs and PSPs
23
60
Retention of foreign currency and outward remittance
25

Part-G: EXPORT THROUGH E-COMMERCE
Page No
61
Business-to-Consumer export through sales orders against receipt in
advance
26
62
Electronic declaration for E-Commerce export
26
63
Business-to-Consumer export through sales orders against cash on
delivery/payment on shipment terms
26
64
Small value export under Business-to-Consumer on e-Commerce website
without EXP
27

Part-H: RE-EXPORT, ENTRE-POT AND MERCHANTING TRADE
Page No
65
Re-export and entre-pot trade
28

--- Page 6 ---
Part-H: RE-EXPORT, ENTRE-POT AND MERCHANTING TRADE
Page No
66
Foreign exchange transactions for merchanting trade
28
67
Settlement of import and export transactions through counter-trade
arrangements
29

Part-I: EXPORT OF CURRENCY NOTES AND COINS, FOREIGN
EXCHANGE, GOLD, SILVER, JEWELLERY AND SECURITIES ETC.
Page No
68
Definition of foreign exchange
31
69
Export of foreign exchange
31
70
Export of local currency
31
71
Export of Securities
31
72
Definition of jewellery and precious stones
32
73
Export of gold jewellery and silver jewellery
32
74
Cost of imported inputs prepaid abroad
32
75
Export of jewellery on consignment basis
32

Part-J: EXPORTERS' RETENTION QUOTA (ERQ) ACCOUNT
Page No
76
Retention quota limits
33
77
Eligible currency and utilization
34
78
International card
35

Part-K: FOREIGN CURRENCY ACCOUNTS FOR ENTERPRISES
OPERATING IN SPECIALIZED ZONES
Page No
79
Disposal of proceeds
36

--- Page 7 ---
vi


Part-L: APPENDIX
Appendix-1
EXP Form
Appendix-2
Export Register
Appendix-3
Certificate of AD for carrier company
Appendix-4
Information relating to export orders with foreign agent commission
Appendix-5
Application for approving remittance of discount on account of readymade
garments and leather goods
Appendix-6
Advance receipt voucher
Appendix-7
PRC Direct Export
Appendix-8
PRC Deemed Export
Appendix-9
Certificate of AD for carrier company
Appendix-10
Form-C
Appendix-11
Form-C (ICT)
Appendix-12
Certificate by AD against IT related services
Appendix-13
Form TM
Appendix-14
Form of Undertaking

--- Page 8 ---
Part-A
GENERAL GUIDELINES

1. Introduction
Export from Bangladesh is regulated by Import and Export (Control) Act, 1950, Export
Policy, and Public Notices issued from time to time by the Ministry of Commerce and
the Office of the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports (CCI&E).

2. Foreign exchange regulations
Authorized Dealers (ADs) may conduct foreign exchange transactions on export in
conformity with the instructions contained in this circular and to be issued by Bangladesh
Bank from time to time in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 20(3) of the
Foreign Exchange Regulation (FER) Act, 1947 (As amended in 2015). Nothing in the
foreign exchange regulations relieves ADs and exporters from the necessity of complying
with the Export Trade Regulations prescribed by the Government and relevant other
regulations such as AML/CFT.

3. International trade rules
ADs shall observe best practices in accordance with applicable international trade rules
such as Uniform Customs and Practice (UCP), Uniform Rules for Collections (URC),
Incoterms, etc. ADs are required to ensure that the terms of the Letters of Credit (LCs)
are in conformity with the rules of prevailing UCP for exports from Bangladesh. While
executing export transactions under sales contracts on documentary collection basis, ADs
are advised to observe the latest version of URC. Local regulations will, however, prevail
in case of contradiction.

4. Registration of exporters
ADs should ensure that exporters are registered under the Importers, Exporters and
Indentors (Registration) Order, 2023.

5. Declaration and repatriation of proceeds
Government Notifications No. 1(6)/ECS/48 and 1(7)/ECS/48 dated July 01, 1948 issued
pursuant to Section 12 of the FER Act, 1947 prohibit export of any goods directly or
indirectly to any place outside Bangladesh, unless a declaration is furnished by the
exporter to the Customs Authority or to such other authority as specified by Bangladesh
Bank. The declaration must confirm that the full export value of the goods has been, or
will be, disposed of in accordance with the manner and within the time frame specified
by Bangladesh Bank.

6. Prescribed form for declaring exports
All exports unless otherwise exempted must be declared on the EXP Form (Appendix-1).
On the Form, exporters shall undertake to repatriate full export proceeds within the
period specified by Bangladesh Bank in terms of the FER Act, 1947.

--- Page 9 ---
7. Export exempted from declaration and repatriation of export proceeds
The regulations mentioned above do not apply to the export of:
(1) bonafide trade samples as per Export Policy in force;
(2) personal effects of travelers whether accompanied or unaccompanied;
(3) ships stores and transhipment cargo;
(4) goods shipped under the orders of the Government of Bangladesh, or any officers
designated by the Government or by the Military, Naval, or Air Force authorities in
Bangladesh for their respective requirements;
(5) gift packets accompanied by a declaration from the sender confirming that the
contents' value is below the Export Policy limit in force and no foreign exchange
transaction is involved;
(6) where the packet is covered by a certificate issued by Bangladesh Bank to the effect
that the export of the parcel does not involve any transaction in foreign exchange;
(7) E-Commerce exports up to USD 500.

Exemptions as above will be allowed by the customs authorities after being satisfied that
the relative exports qualify for such exemptions.

8. Prescribed period to realize export proceeds
(1) The prescribed period for repatriating export proceeds is four months (vide
Bangladesh Bank Notification No. FE 1/77-BB dated April 16, 1977). If the full
proceeds of any shipment are not received within this period, without special or
general authorization from Bangladesh Bank, exporters will be subject to action under
the FER Act, 1947.
(2) In respect of export of raw jute and jute goods, the repatriation period may be up to
360 days against irrevocable confirmed LC or under open account as outlined in Part-
D of this circular. ADs shall conduct extended due diligence while executing export
under usance terms, including satisfying themselves to the effect that export price
quoted is internationally competitive and that the usance interest loaded is at a rate
commensurate with the prevailing interest rate in the concerned currency.

9. Method of receiving payments against exports
Payment for goods and services exported from Bangladesh may be received through an
AD:
(1) in freely convertible foreign currency, including Chinese Yuan (CNY);
(2) in Taka from a non-resident Taka Account;
(3) from Escrow accounts under countertrade arrangements as detailed in Part-H;
(4) under ‘Acquiring Service’ in the realization of proceeds against export through the
internet;
(5) from Online Payment Gateway Service Providers (OPGSPs) and other legitimate
operators as detailed in Part-F.

--- Page 10 ---
10. Retention of export proceeds in foreign currency accounts
Exporters are allowed to retain foreign exchange in foreign currency accounts known as
Exporters’ Retention Quota (ERQ) account at the prescribed limit out of the repatriated
export proceeds as detailed in Part-J of this circular. In addition, export proceeds may also be
retained in single pool for settlement of import liabilities as outlined in relevant instructions.
11. EXP Forms
Export of goods from Bangladesh is subject to declaration by exporters on EXP Form. ADs
may provide Online Export Monitoring System (OEMS) user ID to their customers to
generate electronic EXP Forms. The EXP Form shall contain 11 digits as shown below:
EXP
NO.
AD’s Code
Serial Number
Serial Year












The first four boxes of EXP number will bear the branch code prescribed by Bangladesh
Bank for each AD branch, the next 5 boxes are meant for mentioning the serial number of
the Export Register (Appendix-2) of the branch and the last two boxes are meant for
mentioning the last two digits of the year of registration.

12. Electronic EXP Form
(1) Electronic option to submit EXP Form is acceptable in Bangladesh Bank OEMS for
export of goods prior to customs formalities. Accordingly, ADs shall accept EXP
Form submitted electronically by their exporter-customers, information of which will
subsequently be available in customs electronic system for onward formalities.
(2) Exporters shall execute export formalities with the Customs Authority for issuance of
Bill of Export based on information of EXP Form available in customs electronic
system. Immediately on completion of shipment of goods from Bangladesh, exporters
shall report/submit transport/shipping information in Bangladesh Bank OEMS to
close the procedure. For on time submission of shipment information, ADs need to
follow up with exporters so that they can report shipment information immediately on
completion of shipment of goods. In case of non-reporting, ADs shall complete the
reporting formalities on receipt of documents from exporters within 14 days from the
date of shipment.
(3) Bill of Export issued by the Customs Authority to permit the shipment will suffice the
requirement of existing customs assessment as necessary on paper based EXP Form.
Hence, certification by Customs Authority shall not be required on EXP Form
submitted electronically by exporters.
(4) Within 14 days from the date of shipment of goods from Bangladesh, exporters shall
submit a signed hardcopy of the electronically submitted EXP Form together with Bill
of Export duly certified by the Customs Authority and relevant shipping documents
covering export of goods to ADs for compliance in accordance with paragraph 18 of
this circular.

--- Page 11 ---
(5) Signed hardcopy of EXP Form submitted by exporters to ADs as per (4) above shall
be treated as original. ADs shall post-facto certify the same and observe subsequent
formalities including passing documents abroad for collection and disposal thereof
with routine reports.
(6) Electronic EXP Form is applicable only for export through customs houses having
electronic system of Bill of Export issuance. The paper based EXP Form submission
may continue for exports through customs houses without having electronic
arrangement.
(7) Bangladesh Bank assigns User IDs and Passwords to exporters upon request through
their ADs. In this regard, ADs need to upload the requests containing authenticated
information of exporters to OEMS.

13. Export transactions and proceeds realization guidelines for ADs
(1) Before execution of export transactions, ADs shall satisfy themselves with regard to the
followings:
(a) Arrangements have been made for realization of export proceeds within the
prescribed period;
(b) Arrangements have been made for receipt of title to goods like Bill of Lading,
Airway Bill, etc. by ADs on shipment of the underlying goods;
(c) ADs shall justify bonafide of buyers/consignees abroad and their credentials etc.
where necessary; ADs should make discreet inquiries in this regard through its
correspondents abroad etc., greater care should be taken particularly in cases of
shipments against contract alone and shipments on CAD/DA basis. ADs should
report promptly to Bangladesh Bank, where ADs doubt the bonafides and standing of
the buyers/consignees abroad or where owing to common interest or otherwise they
suspect collusion with the intent of' delaying or avoiding repatriation of export
proceeds. Similarly, ADs should report to Bangladesh Bank cases where it comes to
their knowledge that exporters are directly or indirectly connected with or have any
financial or other interest in the buyer/consignee abroad. If necessary, discreet
enquiry about the bonafides and credentials of the charter party should also be made,
if shipment is to be made against a charter party Bill of Lading.
(2) For delay in repatriation or non-realization of export proceeds, exporters will render
themselves liable to punitive action under the FER Act, 1947. Besides, in the event of non-
realization or short realization of export proceeds against shipment within the stipulated
period, ADs shall obtain from the exporters and furnish to Bangladesh Bank full explanation
as to the circumstances resulting in non-realization/short realization. Therefore, in their own
interest, both exporters and ADs should be alert and active in ensuring timely repatriation of
export proceeds.
(3) ADs are responsible for meticulously complying with relevant regulatory instructions
while processing export transactions. In the event of delay in realization or non-

--- Page 12 ---
realization/short realization of export proceeds due to non-compliance of the regulatory
instructions, ADs and their respective officials will be held liable to punitive action under the
FER Act, 1947.

14. Making out and delivery of shipping documents
In exercise of the powers vested in Bangladesh Bank under Section 20(3) of the FER Act,
1947 all carriers whether common or private (Railway, Shipping, or Airline companies), and
their agents are directed as under:
(1) Transport documents, title to export of goods, must be drawn to the order of an AD in
respect of exports of goods from Bangladesh (excluding exports from Type A industrial
enterprise located in specialized zones) via land or sea routes. These documents shall be
handed over to the authorized representatives of the designated AD only.
(2) If the goods reach the beneficiary port before the transport documents reach the foreign
importer, the AD may request shipping companies to issue Delivery Order to deliver the
goods to the order of AD's correspondent in the buyer’s country. The AD also needs to
send instructions through authenticated channel to its overseas correspondent to hand
over Delivery Order to the consignee, and stating the amount to be realized from the
consignee before the Delivery Order is released.
(3) In respect of export of goods from Bangladesh (excepting exports from Type A
industrial enterprise located in specialized zones) to foreign countries by air, the Airway
Bills and any other documents of title to cargo should be drawn to the order of a bank in
the country of import nominated by the AD designated for this purpose by the
respective exporter and delivered to the authorized representative of AD. The above
directions shall not apply to exports exempted from repatriation of export proceeds as
listed in paragraph 7 of this circular. Exports of fresh fish, vegetables, fruits, poultry
and other goods of perishable nature are also exempted from this direction.
(4) Railway Receipts, Bill of Lading, Airway Bill and other documents of title to cargo
may be drawn to the order of importer or other designated parties only if (a) the
shipment is being made against full payment received in advance by the exporter
through AD and (b) it is a requirement of export LC/contract. In this context, designated
AD shall issue a certificate in the prescribed form (as per Appendix-3) to be produced
to the carrier company, enabling them to draw the shipping documents accordingly.

15. Endorsement of shipping documents
(1) ADs to whose order the relative Railway Receipts, Bills of Lading, etc. are drawn shall
endorse the same to the order of their foreign correspondents but in no case, they shall
make any blank endorsement or endorse it to the order of the consignee unless they have
obtained specific or general approval of Bangladesh Bank thereof. However, in the cases
of export from Type A industrial enterprises located in specialized zones, Bill of
Lading/Airway Bill/other documents of title to cargo drawn to the order of ADs may be

--- Page 13 ---
blank endorsed or endorsed in favor of the consignees as per terms of the export LC/
contract.
(2) In case of export proceeds received after shipment but before sending export documents
abroad for collection, it does not warrant documents to be sent abroad for collection.
ADs may endorse transport documents of title to cargo in favor of the importer or other
designated party and deliver the same as per stipulations of export LC/contract only if
full export proceeds are received through normal banking channel before sending export
documents to counterpart bank abroad for collection.

16. Dispatch of export documents
ADs may allow exporters to dispatch export documents (excluding original transport
document of title to cargo) directly to importers or their agents abroad through secured
media, subject to observance of following instructions:
(1) The underlying LC/contract provides for such direct dispatch of export documents.
(2) ADs shall be satisfied with the arrangement of realization of export proceeds within the
statutory period as per paragraph 8 of this circular.
(3) ADs shall endorse original transport documents retained with them on receipt of
payment against relevant export.
(4) ADs shall, within 14 days from the date of shipment, obtain EXP Form from exporters
to comply with regulatory instructions, including routine reporting to Bangladesh Bank.
(5) Exporters’ accounts with ADs are fully compliant with KYC/AML/CFT guidelines in
force.

17. Negotiation of export documents using shipping documents issued by freight
forwarders
In case of negotiation of export bills using FCRs, HBLs, or HAWBs issued by freight
forwarders, the following additional conditions are to be fulfilled:
(1) The export LC/contract specifically provides for negotiation of export bill against
FCR/HBL/HAWB (as the case may be) issued by a freight forwarder;
(2) The freight forwarder issuing the FCR/HBL/HAWB is operating in Bangladesh with
license from the Customs Authority;
(3) ADs will be responsible for satisfying themselves about the arrangement for timely
repatriation of proceeds of export bill negotiated against FCR/HBL/HAWB.

18. Disposal of EXP Form
(1) The electronic EXP Form is to be considered disposed of after online reporting of export
proceeds repatriation. However, the hard copy of EXP Form is to be disposed of in usual
manner.
Submission of export documents to ADs
(2) The exporter must submit EXP Form along with the invoices and other export documents
to the AD through whom payment for the goods exported is to be received. In the event of

--- Page 14 ---
payment being received through an AD other than the designated AD of exporters, the
AD negotiating or collecting or repatriating proceeds against relative export should
convey the particulars of the EXP Form to the designated AD of exporter to enable the
latter to make a suitable note in the relative export register.
(3) ADs executing export transactions need to receive foreign currency from AD having
repatriated export proceeds. In this context, ADs repatriating export proceeds needs to
transfer the fund in foreign currency to ADs designated for export transactions. In case of
payment against export bill discounting or early payment arrangement in foreign currency
by other ADs or offshore banking units (OBUs), the foreign currency fund shall be
transferred to designated AD. Export proceeds repatriated through ADs of buying agents
shall also be transferred in foreign currency to exporter’s AD. While making transfer,
ADs shall keep records of the transactions suitably for proper reconciliation.
The transfer is to be executed by the following business day on completion of the relevant
transactions through Bangladesh Bank FC clearing service. On receipt of the fund,
designated ADs shall convert the encashable portion of foreign currency in Taka
following the relevant instructions and make the same available to exporter’s account
maintained with them. In all cases, conversion of export proceeds is required to be
executed through designated ADs by the following business day, unless otherwise
exempted, on receipt of the fund in their respective accounts either from other ADs/OBUs
or abroad. However transfer of foreign currency to exporter’s ADs is not mandatory for
jute export facilitated by traders nominated by BJMC.
(4) All shipping documents covering goods exported from Bangladesh and declared on EXP
Form must be passed through ADs within 14 days from the date of shipment. The copy
(signed copy in case of electronic EXP) of the EXP Form and the shipping documents etc.
should be submitted to ADs in time to enable them to report to Bangladesh Bank within
14 days from the date of shipment of the goods covered by the Form.

Scrutiny of documents
(5) On receipt of the EXP Form and the documents covering the exports, ADs shall verify the
shipping documents using online EGM of Customs Authority. ADs shall conduct the
tracking of shipments through tracking system recognized by competent authority for the
cases where EGM data is not available.
ADs should compare the relative bill and/or documents with the relative EXP Form and
satisfy themselves that the declaration made on the Form is correct. In no case, the
invoice value should be less than the value declared for customs purposes. Special care
should be exercised in checking the invoices with a view to detecting misinvoicing of
exports. Any suspicious circumstance should be reported to Bangladesh Bank.
(6) If the difference between the values stated on the EXP Form and the amount of the
bill/invoice is small and accounted for legitimate trade charges etc. ADs may accept the
bill/documents for negotiation/collection. The details of such adjustments must be given

--- Page 15 ---
on the relative form and must be authenticated by ADs under their stamp and signatures.
(7) After negotiation of the bill or acceptance of the documents for collection, ADs should
keep record in export registers.
(8) ADs shall retain the signed EXP Form with them for record and eventual inspection for a
period of 5(five) years. However, in respect of cases which are under investigation by
Bangladesh Bank inspection team/other Government agencies, the EXP Form and full set
of export documents shall be disposed of only after obtaining clearance from the
inspection team/Government agency concerned.

19. Deductable charges
(1) Commission or brokerage due to be paid to foreign importers or to agents by exporters in
Bangladesh relating to the particular shipment may be deducted from the relative bill
amount or the amount of the sale proceeds or remitted from Bangladesh after the full
proceeds have been realized only up to a maximum of 5(five) percent of the value of the
goods. In exceptional cases or where it is customary in any particular trade to pay
commission in excess of 5(five) percent by deduction from the invoice value of exports,
Bangladesh Bank may consider applications by exporters through their ADs and may
grant a standing authority to permit payment of commission in excess of 5(five) percent
of the invoice value. While applying to Bangladesh Bank for such permission, ADs shall
attach application of exporter along with prescribed format at Appendix-4. The
supporting documents have to be preserved by ADs up to prescribed period for
presentation to Bangladesh Bank/inspection team as and when required.
(2) ADs may allow bank charges/trade charges as per stipulation of concerned export
LCs/contracts. Bank charges/trade charges, not specifically stipulated in export
LCs/contracts, may also be settled in accordance with the instructions of UCP and other
applicable international trade rules.
(3) In the case of export of books, journals, and magazines published in Bangladesh,
exporters can allow up to 33.5% discount of the invoice value without prior approval of
Bangladesh Bank.
(4) Cases of discounts claimed by the importers in respect of shipment of readymade
garments and leather goods should be submitted (as per Appendix-5) to the Discount
Committee through Foreign Exchange Policy Department for recommendation/decision.
However, before referring such case to the Committee, ADs must be satisfied about the
genuineness and merit of the case.


20. Use of appropriate incoterms
EXW, FCA, FOB, FAS, CFR, CIF, CPT and CIP incoterms issued by the International
Chamber of Commerce are allowed to use in export from Bangladesh provided those are
stipulated in the relevant LC/contract. Inconsistency, if any, in respect of use of incoterms,
should be informed immediately to the LC issuing bank for necessary amendment with

--- Page 16 ---
intimation to the beneficiary. ADs shall also keep their exporter customers informed of the
appropriate terms and conditions against applicable Incoterms for export so that they can
insist foreign buyers to get LC/contract issued accordingly.

21. Receipts of advance remittances against exports
Before paying out money against remittances received from abroad, where purpose of the
remittance is stated as advance receipt for goods to be exported from Bangladesh, ADs
should obtain a declaration from the beneficiary on the ‘Advance Receipt Voucher (ARV)’,
as per Appendix-6, certifying the purpose of the remittance with report to the ‘Online ARV
Reporting Module’. ADs shall also comply with following instructions before
accommodating the transaction:
(1) The exporter has received confirmed export LC/contract to execute export against
advance payment;
(2) The previous export performance of the exporter is satisfactory and the exporter shall
have adequate capability to execute the export order;
(3) The payment in advance shall not bear any interest;
(4) At least 10% of the payment received in advance shall be retained in the subsidiary
ledger of ADs which will be released on execution of the export;
(5) The instruction in (4) above will not be applicable for advance payment received
against performance bonds or bank guarantees/standby LCs;
(6) Export needs to be executed within a period not exceeding one year from the date of
receipt of advance payment;
(7) In case of non-execution of export including issuance of EXP Form against advance
payment, ADs may allow refund of advance payment. In this case, ADs shall utilize
funds from Exporters’ Retention Quota (ERQ) account first and remainder from Taka
accounts.

22. Short shipments and shipments shut out entirely
Shipping information which is available in online system of Bangladesh Customs shall be
treated as final for reporting in OEMS. ADs shall check authenticity of the shipping
information from online system of Bangladesh Customs Authority before sending any
correction request, if necessary, to Bangladesh Bank.

23. Shipments lost or damaged in transit
If shipments from Bangladesh are lost in transit for which payment has not already been
received either by a direct remittance or by negotiation of bills under an LC, the AD must see
that an insurance claim is made as soon as the loss is known. The relative EXP Form should
contain a statement on the reverse thereof, under the stamp and signature of the AD that the
shipment has been lost, together with the following particulars regarding the insurance
covering the shipment:
(1) Amount of insurance (including currency in which drawn).

--- Page 17 ---
10

(2) Name of the Insurance Company.
(3) Place where the claim is payable.
Where the claims are payable in a currency other than Taka, they should be realized through
the designated ADs who, on satisfaction of the claim, should certify note on the EXP Form
and report to Bangladesh Bank.

24. Shipments on FOB basis
In cases where freight has been paid in Bangladesh but export documents are on FOB basis
should be reported to Bangladesh Bank.

25. Reporting of overdue cases
ADs are required to upload information on overdue EXP Forms to OEMS by the 10th day of
each month, including the reason for the overdue status, actions taken to realize export
proceeds, and litigation status (if applicable).

26. Online reporting
ADs will report export transactions to OEMS of Bangladesh Bank on regular basis.

27. Export proceeds realization certificate (PRC) against direct and deemed exports
ADs shall follow the instructions in case of issuance of PRCs as under:
(1) ADs shall use prescribed proforma in Appendix-7 to issue PRCs for proceeds realized
against direct exports while prescribed proforma in Appendix-8 shall be used to issue
PRCs for proceeds realized against deemed exports. PRC is to be issued using OEMS.
(2) Head Office/Principal Branch of the AD shall send updated list of its officials along
with their specimen signatures, PA nos. and phone numbers who are authorized to sign
PRCs to the Offices of the 'Bond Commissionerate' and 'Duty Exemption and
Drawback Office (DEDO)' from time to time for verifying the genuineness of issued
PRCs.
(3) ADs are advised to exercise utmost caution in issuing PRCs to avoid any possible
misuse. Any irregularity shall be treated as violation of Bangladesh Bank's instructions.
ADs are also advised to extend their full co-operation to different government agencies
regarding verification of any PRC if approached.

28. Discounting of direct and deemed export bills in foreign exchange
Beneficiaries of usance export bills against direct and deemed exports of products produced
in Bangladesh may arrange to discount bills for immediate financing through their ADs,
subject to compliance with the following instructions:
(1) ADs shall have to be ensured that the usance bills presented for discounting are derived
from bonafide direct/deemed export transactions;
(2) ADs may arrange fund against the discounting of usnace bills in foreign exchange
through their own fund/OBUs/correspondent banks, financial institutions abroad or
international financing institutions;

--- Page 18 ---
11

(3) Expenses of the customers for discounting bills shall not exceed mark-up of 4.00
percent over benchmark rate, e.g. SOFR, Euribor etc. (all in cost) including all types of
commissions/charges/fees/interests;
(4) Proceeds from such discounting may be retained in relevant single pool for import
payments/back to back liabilities. Type C enterprise of specialized zones can avail this
facility under the stipulations in this regard.

29. Right to assignment of export bills
General permission is granted to assign an exporter’s rights to a usance export bill in favor of
a licensed bank or financing institution abroad, provided the institution has fully prepaid the
usance bill as a final and without-recourse settlement, subject to adherence with the
instructions outlined in paragraph 28 of this circular.

30. Insurance coverage against financing to exporters
(1) ADs may, at their option, safeguard their financing against bill discounting on recourse
basis by appropriate insurance coverage available from insurance companies locally as
an extra comfort. Before obtaining insurance coverage, ADs should take consent from
exporters in this regard.
(2) Besides post shipment financing, the proposition of offsetting the default risk by
appropriate insurance coverage may be adopted against funded or non-funded facilities
to exporters at pre-shipment stage.
(3) Financing safeguard by insurance coverage will not give waiver from realization of
export proceeds. Hence, export proceeds need to be repatriated as per requirement of
foreign exchange regulations in force.

--- Page 19 ---
12

Part-B
EXPORT FROM THE SPECIALIZED ZONES

31. Principles and procedures
There are different specialized zones operating in Bangladesh. They are Export Processing
Zones (EPZs) established by the Bangladesh Export Processing Zones Authority Act, 1980,
Private Export Processing Zones (PEPZs) established by the Bangladesh Private Export
Processing Zones Authority Act, 1980, Economic Zones (EZs) established by the Bangladesh
Economic Zones Act, 2010, Hi-Tech Parks (HTPs) established by the Bangladesh Hi-Tech
Park Authority Act, 2010. The following types of industrial enterprises operate in the
specialized zones:
(1) Type A: 100 percent foreign owned including those owned by Bangladeshi nationals
ordinarily resident abroad;
(2) Type B: Joint venture projects between foreign and Bangladesh entrepreneurs
resident in Bangladesh;
(3) Type C: 100 percent Bangladeshi entrepreneurs resident in Bangladesh.
Developers and different service providing companies (water supply/treatment, cleaning,
dust management, effluent treatment plant, etc.) operating in specialized zones, exclusively
formed and registered to serve a particular zone will be treated as industrial enterprises of
zones for foreign exchange regulation purposes.
32. Declaration of export
Exports from specialized zones are subject to the usual requirement of declaration of exports
in EXP Form and repatriation of export proceeds.

33. Disposal of export proceeds
Export proceeds against export of exporting enterprises will be released to their foreign
currency accounts in accordance with Part-K of this circular.

34. Discounting of accepted usance bills of specialized zones’ enterprises (Type A and B)
Balances in Non-Resident Foreign Currency Deposit (NFCD) accounts may be utilized for
discounting usance bills drawn by Type A and Type B enterprise of specialized zones for
supplying raw materials under back to back arrangement and accepted by ADs operating
outside specialized zones. However, utilization of NFCD fund for the above purpose
including payment for back to back sight LCs as instructed will not exceed 50% of total
NFCD balance of the concerned AD.

35. Sale of Bangladeshi goods to enterprises in specialized zones
Sales of Bangladeshi goods or raw materials to the enterprises in specialized zones against
payment in foreign currency shall be treated as exports from Bangladesh and normal foreign
exchange regulations concerning declaration of exports on EXP Forms and repatriation of
proceeds is applicable to these exports to zones’ enterprises.

--- Page 20 ---
13


Exports to specialized zone areas shall be considered as imports by respective enterprises. In
such cases, ADs of zone enterprises may report such import transactions to Bangladesh Bank
in monthly schedule E-2 under Statement-10 or Statement-11 (as the case may be)
mentioning the number of concerned EXP forms to which the payment in foreign currency
relate. This procedure of mentioning EXP numbers will also be applicable for transactions
between EPZ enterprises and intra EPZ enterprises. The above procedure will be applicable
for reporting in online web portal. Usual IMP Form reporting procedures will, however, be
applicable for imports by EPZ enterprises from abroad.

National Board of Revenue (NBR) vide its order no. 288/2017/Customs/529 dated December
21, 2017 effects relevant amendment in the Customs (Economic Zones) Procedures, 2017 to
waive export/import formalities (EXP/IMP) for transactions between enterprises operating in
Domestic Processing Area (DPA) of EZs and in Tariff Area (TA) of Bangladesh.
Accordingly, EXP Form procedure will not be applicable for such EZ enterprises to sell
goods in Taka to TA. Hence, transactions by DPA enterprises in EZs irrespective of their
ownership status are allowed to settle their liabilities for imports and other permissible
expenses out of the fund held in their Taka accounts.

--- Page 21 ---
14

Part-C
EXPORT TRADE TRANSACTIONS, APPROPRIATE SAFEGUARDS

36. Regulations for cross-border banking and AML/CFT compliance
ADs are permitted to maintain accounts in freely convertible/permissible currencies with
their correspondents/branches abroad. The relevant regulation requires ADs to comply with
AML/CFT regulations for maintaining relationship, opening of nostro accounts, and
transactions with correspondents. In addition, different regulatory instructions are in place for
containment of risk factors against cross-border transactions, such as:
(1) Procedures are contained in ‘Core Risk Management in Banking: Foreign Exchange
Risk Management’ to maintain cross-border correspondent banking relationships,
including observance of applicable extended due diligence and restriction to maintain
any correspondent relationship with shell banks, inter alia;
(2) Circular No. 26 issued by Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit (BFIU) on June 16,
2020, including its subsequent circulars outlines instructions to be followed regarding
selection of customers and establishment of correspondent relations with banks abroad,
inter alia. The instructions contained therein restrict to establish and conduct
transactions with shell banks;
(3) Preventive measures are available in Guidelines for Prevention of Trade Based Money
Laundering issued by BFIU, etc.

37. Safeguards for export trade transactions
To ensure safeguards in export trade, ADs need to observe appropriate measures before
execution of transactions as noted here under:

(1) ADs shall facilitate export transactions under LCs routed through authenticated
channels from banks with whom appropriate relations are in place;
(2) ADs shall, in addition to be ensured of apparent authenticity of LCs, satisfy themselves
of bonafide of applicant banks/issuing banks in case of LCs received through
authenticated channels from third banks. In this case, ADs need to be ensured that
applicant banks/issuing banks will receive export documents directly from respective
ADs or through third banks/other authenticated banks with whom respective ADs
maintain appropriate relationship;
(3) In case of transferred LCs, ADs shall satisfy themselves of bonafide of first beneficiary
and transferring bank in addition to the LC applicant banks/issuing bank;
(4) ADs shall satisfy bonafide of importers abroad as per paragraph 13(1)(c) of this
circular;
(5) ADs shall conduct due diligence regarding importers’ banks designated for the
transactions under sales contracts for being ensured of their step by step responsibilities
regarding release of export documents to importers and procedural arrangement of

--- Page 22 ---
15

payment as per prevailing regulations and relevant provisions of the URC in force. In
this case, ADs need to be ensured that importer’s banks will receive export documents
directly from respective ADs or through third banks/other authenticated banks with
whom respective ADs maintain appropriate relationship;
(6) ADs shall adopt other measures as deemed necessary.

38. Guidance for exporters in case of transaction issues
In case of 37 above in trouble to be executed, and/or any doubt regarding the transactions,
ADs shall guide exporters so that they can take appropriate measures for execution of the
transactions, such as:
(1) to change designated banks of importers acceptable to ADs;
(2) to bring the transactions under external payment guarantees as per paragraph 39 of this
circular; and
(3) to make other suitable arrangements.

--- Page 23 ---
16

Part-D
EXPORT UNDER OPEN ACCOUNT CREDIT TERMS

39. Open account credit terms for exports
ADs may allow exporters to ship goods on sales contracts under open account credit terms
within the statutory period, if otherwise not extended, from the date of shipment, subject to
compliance with following instructions:
(1) Exports shall be executed against payment undertaking/payment risk coverage for
settlement of export bills/receivables within the permissible statutory period by
international factoring companies/foreign banks/foreign financial institutions/trade
financiers/insurance entities (hereinafter referred to as designated institutions) arranged
in association with importers and/or exporters.
(2) Payment undertaking/payment risk coverage by designated institutions abroad shall be,
in case of default by importers, received in such a way so as to be ensured of payment
on priority basis in accordance with appropriate underlying arrangements for settlement
on the basis of physical/electronic presentation of export invoices/bills/documents.
(3) Payment undertaking/payment risk coverage from designated institutions abroad may
contain option for early payment arrangement before maturity against the relative
export bills/receivables. Early payment shall be arranged on non-recourse basis from
designated
institutions
or
designated
financiers
based
on
the
payment
undertaking/payment risk coverage.

40. Financing and payment terms
ADs shall satisfy themselves that exporters are appropriately financed. Expenses to exporters
for guarantee commission against payment undertaking/payment risk coverage, and interest
with relevant charges for early payment against export bills/receivables shall not exceed
mark-up of 4.00 percent over benchmark rate, e.g., SOFR, Euribor etc. (all in cost) annually.
These will, however, not include normal bank charges required for transactions. For
calculation of FOB export value, such charges need to be adjusted. Additionally, ADs may, in
case of export claims, exercise the permissible authorization on outward remittances for
effecting the respective payments.

41. Competitive export pricing
Export price declared in EXP Form shall be competitive in consideration of necessary costs
for underlying periods of export under open account credit terms.

42. Counterparty arrangements and membership requirements
ADs should have counterparty arrangements/relations for such transactions with designated
institutions of repute with acceptable credit ratings operating under the licenses of central
banks/competent authorities, for which they may join globally recognized professional bodies
having representation for the services. Payments on account of membership/affiliation/

--- Page 24 ---
17

subscription required for joining such bodies are remittable abroad subject to deduction of
applicable taxes.

43. Issuance and handling of transport documents
ADs may allow transport documents to be issued in accordance with underlying
arrangements among the parties. In case of issuance of transport documents in the name of
importers or other nominated parties as per arrangements, ADs may give instructions (as per
Appendix-9) to carrier companies. Export invoices/bills/documents can be sent abroad
through banking channel/electronic platform/suitable arrangements directly to designated
institutions/importers/other relevant parties as per requirement of the underlying
arrangements.

44. Timeline for submission of export documents
The process to send the export invoices/bills/documents abroad as noted at 43 of this circular
need to be completed within 14 days from the date of shipment. Within this period, exporters
shall submit a full set of export documents, including signed EXP Form to ADs for
regulatory compliance as referred to paragraph 18 of this circular.

45. Early payment facilities for exporters
Subject to observance of relevant instructions noted herein, ADs may extend early payment
facilities to exporters on non-recourse basis out of their own funds against payment
undertaking/payment risk coverage from designated institutions abroad. ADs shall ensure
that the fund used for early payment is not committed for otherwise use. Payment guarantee
commission payable abroad shall be within the all-in-cost limit to be charged to exporters as
per paragraph 40 of this circular.

46. Assignment of export proceeds
In case of exercise of early payment option, relevant portion of export proceeds may be
assigned to designated institutions or designated financiers abroad as per arrangements in
terms of paragraph 29 of this circular.

47. Verification of export and compliance with KYC/AML standards
ADs shall be satisfied with the bonafide of underlying exports shipped from Bangladesh for
which export invoices are to be financed and shall comply with KYC and AML/CFT
standards, including applicable tax regulations on relevant expenses payable abroad.

48. Consultation on international factoring guidelines
ADs may, for technical support, consult with the Guidelines on International Factoring
prepared by the technical committee on factoring.

--- Page 25 ---
18

Part-E
EXPORT OF SERVICES INCLUDING INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY ENABLED SERVICES

49. Export of software and data entry/processing services
Foreign exchange earnings from export of computer software and data entry/data processing
services through internet or other electronic media shall be realized and reported to
Bangladesh Bank by ADs as per following counts:
(1) Where export is undertaken in physical form
As in the case of merchandise exports, EXP procedure as described in paragraph 12 of
this circular shall be followed where export is undertaken in physical form, that is,
where computer software and data entry/data processing services are exported in
compact disk, flash drive, tape, etc.
(2) Where export is undertaken in non-physical form
EXP procedure will not be applicable for export undertaken in non-physical form such
as internet or other electronic media. For collection of proceeds against exports in non-
physical forms, instructions mentioned in this Part and Part-F shall have to be followed
by ADs and exporters concerned.

50. Business process outsourcing
Besides firms/companies, individuals may also provide services outsourced by non-residents
through internet. The payment against the services is normally due on delivery of the services
and it may not necessarily require documents for collection of export proceeds. In this case,
ADs are free to credit to the account of the relevant service exporter in equivalent local
currency after retention of foreign currency in ERQ account maintained in the name of the
exporter subject to observance of the following terms and conditions:
(1) ADs shall satisfy themselves on examination of the relevant documents (such as e-mail
communication) and the message relating to the inward remittance that the payment has
been received from the respective non-resident customers to whom services have been
delivered in accordance with specific arrangements;
(2) ADs shall ensure that the individual beneficiaries have necessary capacities to provide
the underlying services;
(3) ADs shall encash the inward remittance on receipt of online Form-C (Appendix-10)
duly filled through electronic means from the individual beneficiaries. To mention,
separate Form-C (ICT) (Appendix-11) shall be used for reporting inward remittance on
account of ICT related services for easy codification of the purpose and usual report to
Bangladesh Bank in relevant statement/schedule and online reporting module. ADs are
instructed to adhere to the instructions enumerated in the Form while reporting inward
remittances on account of ICT related services. However, inward remittance up to USD
20,000 (twenty thousand) or equivalent against service exports may be credited in the
respective accounts of service exporters without obtaining declaration on Form-C. In
this context, ADs shall satisfy themselves of the bonafide of the transactions based on

--- Page 26 ---
19

the notation of the relevant message. In case of non-availability of required information,
ADs shall contact the beneficiaries through e-mail about the purpose of transactions;
(4) ADs shall have secured electronic communication channels for Form-C under internet
banking network, with customers. ADs shall execute transactions after being satisfied
with the electronic information received through authenticated channels regarding
Form-C. Afterwards, ADs shall take a printout of Form-C and get it signed by
beneficiaries within 30 days for preservation. Signature will not be required if Form-C
is
received
automatically
through
designated
‘app’
having
appropriate
security/protection measures. ADs shall, however, preserve information contained in
electronic Form-C. In case of inward remittances received favoring beneficiaries
maintaining accounts with different ADs, remittance receiving ADs are advised to
transfer the same immediately to relevant ADs through ‘FC Clearing BD-RTGS
System’;
(5) ADs shall ensure deduction of applicable taxes, if any;
(6) ADs shall exercise due diligence in respect of the transactions and comply with foreign
exchange regulations, AML/CFT standards and other relevant laws/regulations in force;
and
(7) ADs shall keep records in support of the transactions and report the same in relevant
monthly schedules/statement to Bangladesh Bank.

51. Business services
There are other service exports such as business services, professional/research and advisory
services, etc. rendered from Bangladesh against which payments in foreign exchange are
received through ADs. Remittances from abroad as payments against these and all other non-
agency service exports in non-physical form may also be credited to local currency accounts
and ERQ accounts in the names of the concerned exporters, subject to observance of the same
instructions as stated above.

52. Time limit for repatriation of export earnings
The instructions to repatriate export proceeds against goods as noted at 8(1) of this circular
are equally applicable to repatriation of export proceeds against services as defined at Section
2(bbb) of the FER Act, 1947.

53. Export proceeds and retention abroad
Part-F of this circular outlines operational modalities on services delivered in non-physical
form relating to ICT and other businesses. Service exporters can maintain notional/merchant
accounts to repatriate their income through concerned ADs in Bangladesh as per paragraph
56 and 58 of this circular. Excepting these authorized accounts, retention of export proceeds
abroad in any form without limiting to equity/portfolio investment, purchase of physical
assets/virtual assets, maintenance of accounts regardless of currencies including
cryptocurrencies constitutes contravention of Section 5(1)(e)(i) of the FER Act, 1947 and is
subject to cognizance under Section 23(1) of the said Act as per SRO No. 59-LAW/2021
dated March 08, 2021.

--- Page 27 ---
20

Part-F
EXPORT PROCEED REALIZATION SERVICES

54. Acquiring services
In addition to transmission of IT enabled products through internet, or other electronic
media, IT/Software exporting firms may sell their products/services to customers abroad
through web/internet. In the context of web based trade, ADs may work as ‘Acquiring
Banks’ for realization of internet/web generated payment through International Credit Card
favoring IT/Software firms registered and operating in Bangladesh subject to compliance
with following terms and conditions:
(1) ADs shall have merchant agreements with the beneficiaries having necessary approval
from the competent authorities and necessary arrangements for safe internet
transactions;
(2) ADs shall have to be satisfied that online payment is relevant to the nature of business
of the beneficiaries;
(3) ADs shall make the payment, credited to their nostro accounts, available to
beneficiaries’ accounts on receipt of Form-C (if applicable) duly filled in from the
beneficiaries. The ERQ accounts of the beneficiaries may be credited to the extent of
permissible limit from the total payment provided that the transactions deserve such
credits;
(4) ADs shall comply with the instructions stated contained in paragraph 50 of this circular;
(5) ADs shall keep records of the transactions with documentary evidence in support of the
payment.
(6) ADs shall have to comply with the applicable regulations of foreign exchange
transactions, AML/CFT, Payment and Settlement Systems and other relevant
laws/regulations in force and report the transactions with monthly returns to Bangladesh
Bank in the relevant schedules/statements.

55. Repatriation of proceeds against export traded under E-Commerce
ADs may enter into merchant agreements with eligible exporters to provide ‘Acquiring
Service’ in repatriating export proceeds received through ICC on internet against sales of
exportable goods concluded on web platform under cross border E-Commerce. Details of the
transaction are outlined in paragraph 61 of this circular.

56. Repatriation of export proceeds through OPGSPs
ADs are permitted to facilitate the repatriation of remittances against small value service
exports in non-physical form such as data entry/data process, off-shore IT service, business
process outsourcing, etc. through OPGSPs, subject to compliance with the following
instructions:
(1) ADs shall enter into standing arrangements with internationally recognized OPGSPs
and maintain separate nostro collection account for each OPGSP to repatriate the
above-mentioned service export related payments. Service exporters availing of this

--- Page 28 ---
21

facility shall open notional accounts with only those OPGSPs having arrangements
with ADs in Bangladesh. It shall be ensured that no funds are retained in such accounts
and all receipts shall be automatically swept and pooled into the nostro collection
account maintained by the ADs. In no way, income in foreign exchange by residents
can be retained in notional accounts like resident bank accounts. OPGSPs shall observe
it with strict compliance.
(2) This facility shall only be available for service export in non-physical form of value
not exceeding USD 10,000 per transaction.
(3) The following debits will only be permitted to the nostro collection account opened
and maintained under this arrangement:
(a) Repatriation of funds representing service export (as mentioned in the
opening paragraph) proceeds to Bangladesh for payment to service
exporters;
(b) Payment of fee/commission to OPGSP as per the predetermined rates/
frequency/arrangement; and
(c) Charge back to the service recipient/importer where the service exporter has
failed in discharging the obligations as per specifications.
(4) ADs shall repatriate the balances held in the nostro collection account and arrange to
credit the respective exporter’s account with a bank in Bangladesh on being confirmed
that the export proceeds have been swept and pooled into the nostro collection account
from the exporter’s notional account.
(5) ADs shall satisfy themselves as to the bonafide of the transactions on examination of
relevant documents and credit the amount in ERQ account of exporters up to the
permissible limit at their options. The remainder (or up to full, at exporter’s option)
shall mandatorily be credited in local currency accounts after conversion. ADs shall
also ensure deduction of applicable taxes, if any and payment thereof.
(6) Besides online reporting and monthly reporting in schedules/statements of the
transactions to Bangladesh Bank with appropriate purpose codes, ADs shall submit all
the relevant information/documents relating to any transaction under this arrangement
to Bangladesh Bank, as and when advised to do so.
(7) Each nostro collection account shall be subject to reconciliation and audit on a
quarterly basis as per regulatory requirements.
(8) Resolution of all payment related complaints of exporters/service providers in
Bangladesh shall remain the responsibility of OPGSPs concerned.
(9) ADs entering into arrangements with any OPGSPs shall report to the Foreign
Exchange Policy Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka with necessary
details. The arrangements are subject to strict compliance by OPGSPs with the
instructions contained in this circular.
(10) As usual, ADs shall exercise due diligence in respect of the transactions with OPGSPs
and comply with the foreign exchange regulations, AML/CFT regulations and any
other relevant laws/regulations in force.

--- Page 29 ---
22


57. Repatriation of ICT related service income through international card
ADs may provide facilities to credit inward remittances received in international card
numbers/accounts against the services provided by individual developers/freelancers of
mobile Apps and Games having acknowledgements/training/boot-camps/hackathons/course
participation certificates on mobile application development arranged by government
authority/BASIS, or its member organization and any other recognized training/academic
institutes. In this context, ADs shall issue to individual developers/freelancers international
cards (termed as 'Freelancer Card') having duel currency units with features of being prepaid
from abroad and observe the following instructions:
(1) On receipts of the payment, up to eligible ERQ portion may be credited at the options of
beneficiaries in foreign currency unit of the card, the remainder mandatorily in local
currency unit after conversion at prevailing exchange rate.
(2) The balance held in foreign currency unit of the card as ERQ is usable for payment,
through usual banking channel, on international current account transactions for
bonafide business expenses including legitimate expenses for personal purposes. The
cards may be used for permissible online transactions from Bangladesh. Outward
remittances from foreign currency balance are subject to fulfillment of taxes payment
obligations, if any.
(3) Inward receipt exceeding USD 20,000 (Twenty thousand) or equivalent is subject to
declaration on Form-C (ICT).
(4) ADs shall report the transactions to Bangladesh Bank in relevant statement/schedule
and online reporting system mentioning appropriate code relevant to ICT/computer
services.

58. Repatriation of export proceeds through payment service providers
(1) In addition to paragraph 56 of this circular, ADs may allow their service exporter-
customers to enter into arrangements, including maintenance of merchant accounts,
with international market places/platforms. In addition to such accounts, service
exporters may maintain notional accounts, without limiting to licensed OPGSPs, with
internationally reputed payment service aggregators, payment facilitators, digital
wallets or other legitimate payment systems licensed by the regulatory authorities
concerned. Accordingly, ADs shall facilitate repatriation of service income deposited
in their nostro accounts by international market places/platforms including eligible
foreign payment operators, regardless of having arrangements and maintaining
separate nostro collection accounts. In this context, ADs shall obtain-
(a) detailed information from their service exporter-customers regarding maintenance
of merchant accounts with international market places/platforms and/or notional
accounts with eligible foreign payment operators;
(b) declaration on the nature of services to be provided by service exporter-customers
with supporting information and documents thereon;

--- Page 30 ---
23

(c) undertaking from their customers to the effect that they will arrange repatriation of
the service income within statutory period either by way of (i) concerned market
places/platforms or eligible foreign payment operators, or (ii) credit to their
merchant/notional accounts for immediate transfer to Bangladesh. Accordingly,
customers’ due diligences and other regulatory compliances need to be observed.
(2) While on receipt of inward remittances in nostro accounts on account of service income
by way of international market places/platforms or eligible foreign payment operators as
per above, ADs shall observe following procedures:
(a) ADs shall credit the receipts in equivalent local currency to respective bank
accounts, or arrange to transfer the same to digital wallets maintained with Mobile
Financial Service Providers licensed by Bangladesh Bank. At the option of their
service exporter-customers, ADs may make the fund available to ERQ accounts
up to the permissible limit before transfer the equivalent local currency to
respective bank accounts/digital wallets.
(b) In case exporters’ ADs are different, at the option of service exporters for
maintaining ERQ accounts, ADs repatriating service income shall transfer the
repatriated fund through nostro/clearing accounts of Bangladesh Bank to
concerned ADs in invoicing currency. For such transfer, beneficiary ADs will
follow reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank.
(c) Regulations on deductions of applicable taxes and payment thereof need to be
complied with.

(3) Service income is to be repatriated in permissible currencies as per paragraph 9 and
within statutory period as prescribed in paragraph 52 of this circular. Service exporters
can operate no accounts abroad for store of value other than merchant or notional
accounts as per above.
(4) At the option of international market places/platforms and eligible foreign payment
operators, ADs may maintain KYC and AML/CFT compliant foreign currency accounts
and non-resident Taka accounts in their names as per general authorization of foreign
exchange regulations for payments on account of service income by debit to the accounts,
subject to observance of relevant instructions as noted at (2) above.
(5) ADs shall observe reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank with appropriate codification
and comply with the relevant foreign exchange regulations, AML/CFT norms and any
other relevant laws/regulations in force.

59. Repatriation of income from IT related services through MFSPs and PSPs
(1) Mobile Financial Service Providers (MFSPs) and Payment Service Providers (PSPs)
licensed by Bangladesh Bank are allowed for repatriation of export proceeds in
association with internationally recognized OPGSPs/digital wallets and/or aggregators
having operations in multiple countries (hereinafter referred to as foreign payment service
providers, PSPs). Accordingly, MFSPs and PSPs shall –

--- Page 31 ---
24

(a) have standing arrangements with foreign PSPs.
(b) maintain settlement accounts in equivalent Taka with ADs, under agreements for
this particular purpose, through whom repatriation of export proceeds shall be
channeled by foreign PSPs.
(c) make funds available to digital wallets of eligible exporters upon credit of the
fund in settlement accounts.
(d) maintain electronic records of transactions in detail and make them available to
Bangladesh Bank as and when required.

(2) ADs shall observe, in connection with operation of the transactions, the following
instructions:
(a) ADs shall transfer the fund, on receipt in their nostro accounts, to settlement
accounts in equivalent Taka of MFSPs and PSPs. While executing the transfer,
ADs shall comply with deduction and payment of taxes, if applicable.
(b) As an alternative to (a) above, ADs may maintain accounts in the name of foreign
PSPs at their desire in foreign currency/Taka as per foreign exchange regulations
to facilitate the said transfer by debit the accounts. Overdraft facilities may be
allowed for the accounts so maintained provided that ADs shall have payment
guarantees from banks acceptable to them for the adequate amounts based on the
transaction flows.
(c) ADs may maintain ERQ accounts in the name of ITES exporters to be arranged in
association with MFSPs and PSPs up to the extent of permissible limit from
repatriated proceeds. In this case, ADs shall make funds available to ERQ
accounts as per standing arrangement in foreign currency before transfer of the
funds to settlement accounts of MFSPs and PSPs.

(3) MFSPs and PSPs entering into arrangements with foreign PSPs shall intimate through
their designated ADs to Payment Systems Department and Foreign Exchange Policy
Department at Bangladesh Bank head office with necessary details. They shall observe
admissible procedures to execute transactions in accordance with regulatory instructions
issued by Bangladesh Bank from time to time.

(4) Due diligence in respect of the transactions needs to be observed regarding foreign
exchange/payment systems regulations, KYC and AML/CFT standards and relevant
laws/regulations in force.

(5) ADs maintaining settlement accounts may issue encashment certificates in support of
remittances on request from MFSPs and PSPs electronically. In this case, the request
needs to be supported by auto-generated information – beneficiary’s name, wallet account
number, amount in Taka, and date of credit from remittance service provider abroad.
Based on their own screening parameters regarding the information, designated ADs shall
generate electronic encashment certificate (as per Appendix-12) with QR code accessible

--- Page 32 ---
25

to beneficiaries through MFSPs and PSPs. The above-mentioned certificate is intended to
be used for Income Tax purposes only.

60. Retention of foreign currency and outward remittance
ADs need to intimate individual beneficiaries regarding their option for retention in foreign
currency in ERQ accounts before encashment of inward remittances. Without their consent,
ADs should not outrightly encash inward remittances for credit in Taka accounts. ADs should
also guide their customers on facilities of outward remittances out of retention amount for
bonafide current account transactions as per relevant ERQ regulations.

--- Page 33 ---
26

Part-G
EXPORT THROUGH E-COMMERCE

61. Business-to-Consumer export through sales orders against receipt in advance
In order to promote Business-to-Consumer export by hosting goods on E-Commerce website
accessible through internet to foreign buyers, ADs are allowed to provide acquiring services
to eligible exporters for repatriation of export proceeds against sales orders of exportable
goods received on E-Commerce website. In this context, ADs shall observe the operational
procedures as outlined below:
(1) ADs shall have the merchant agreement with the exporters having necessary
arrangements for safe internet transactions;
(2) This facility shall only be available for small value export of value in Cost and Freight
(CFR) term not exceeding USD 5,000 per transaction. Transport documents for
shipment of the goods with EXP Form procedure may be issued in the name of foreign
buyer;
(3) On receipt of internet settled full export proceeds in convertible foreign currency in
nostro accounts, EXP Form formalities can be observed. Procedure for ARV needs not
to be observed in this regard;
(4) Settlement may be executed by way of international cards, OPGSPs, digital wallets, and
other legitimate payment systems licensed by the concerned regulatory authorities. ADs
shall observe due diligence for secured arrangements with foreign counterparts by
which the payments so received need to be credited in their nostro accounts before
making the fund available to customers;
(5) ADs shall, on receipt of electronic EXP Form from exporters not exceeding 14 days of
shipment, credit export proceeds to the respective accounts (up to permissible limit to
ERQ account and remainder in Taka account) of exporters and report the execution of
export with proceeds realized in the online reporting system. ADs shall also observe
routine procedures to report the transactions to Bangladesh Bank in usual monthly
returns, and
(6) In case of failure to execute the export, the payment credited in nostro accounts may be
refunded to foreign buyers.
(7) ADs shall exercise due diligence in respect of the transactions and comply with relevant
laws/regulations in force.

62. Electronic declaration for E-Commerce export
Electronic declaration of EXP Form by exporters submitted in accordance with relevant
instructions shall be acceptable to ADs providing acquiring services for repatriation of
proceeds against export of goods concluded on E-Commerce website.

63. Business-to-Consumer export through sales orders against cash on delivery/payment
on shipment terms
ADs may allow business-to-consumer exports of each sale on E-Commerce website up to
USD 500 or equivalent under cash on delivery/payment on shipment terms subject to:

--- Page 34 ---
27

(1) ADs shall have counterparty arrangements with foreign payment service providers to
realize the payments by debit their foreign currency accounts or Taka accounts
maintained with ADs in terms of general authorization;
(2) Overdraft facilities will be allowed for the accounts so maintained in Bangladesh
provided that ADs shall have payment guarantees, from banks acceptable to them, for
the adequate amounts based on the transaction flows.

64. Small value export under Business-to-Consumer on E-Commerce website without
EXP
Declaration on EXP Form to Customs Authority will not be required for small value export
up to USD 500 or equivalent concluded on E-Commerce website against payment received
prior to shipment. In this context, ADs shall observe following provisions:
(1) ADs shall obtain a declaration from their customers executing export under Business-
to-Consumer on E-Commerce website to the effect that (i) they will export goods at fair
value, (ii) they will provide shipment details like online orders, Bill of Export, courier
receipts, etc. immediately from date of shipment, (iii) they will give details of
nominated express/courier service providers having valid licenses from competent
authority, and (iv) they will observe relevant provisions of the FER Act, 1947 and
circulars issued thereunder;
(2) Nominated express/courier service providers shall observe formalities with Customs
Authority and arrange issuance of Bill of Export against the relevant shipments;
(3) Inward remittances received prior to shipment through legitimate channels against
orders concluded at website need to be retained in margin accounts in the name of
exporters till receipt of Bill of Export and other relevant documents;
(4) On receipt of Bill of Export, ADs shall make fund available to customers’ accounts in
equivalent Taka excluding retention portion which may be credited in ERQ accounts at
the option of exporters;
(5) ADs shall report the transactions to Bangladesh Bank reporting system under E-
Commerce with reference to Bill of Export extracting from customs electronic system;
(6) ADs may allow export under Business-to-Consumer on home delivery basis (DDP
term) provided that sufficient amount payable to nominated express/courier service
providers on account of relevant costs at destinations along with transport and other
charges are realized from consumers abroad;
(7) ADs shall make customers’ due diligence including compliance with KYC norms and
AML/CFT standards before onboarding exporters;
(8) ADs shall maintain customer-wise electronic records of transactions which need to be
made available to Bangladesh Bank or its inspection team as and when asked for.
(9) ADs shall intimate details of E-Commerce customers including express/courier service
providers to Foreign Exchange Policy Department (Divison-1) and Foreign Exchange
Operation Department (Divison-2) of Bangladesh Bank, Head office within 7 days of
allowing exporters to execute export under this framework.

--- Page 35 ---
28

Part-H
RE-EXPORT, ENTRE-POT, MERCHANTING TRADE AND COUNTER TRADE

65. Re-export and entre-pot trade
Re-export and entre-pot trade by exporters of Bangladesh are subject to the guidelines of the
Ministry of Commerce disseminated through Import Policy Order and Export Policy in force
published from time to time. However, ADs will abide by the following instructions in
conducting foreign exchange transactions in such cases:
(1) Compliance with relevant instructions of Ministry of Commerce including prescribed
minimum value addition requirement is to be ensured;
(2) In case of re-export, import value (including freight) will be met from repatriated export
value only. Besides, usual IMP and EXP procedures will have to be followed in import
(including freight) and export of goods respectively;
(3) In case of entre-port, import value (including freight) will be met from repatriated
export value only. Declaration in 'Form-C', and 'Form TM' (Appendix-13) shall be used
for reporting receipts of export value and making import payments (including freight)
respectively.

66. Foreign exchange transactions for merchanting trade
(1) In accordance with Export Policy in force, a trade in which goods/services procured
from a country are shipped/delivered directly to a third country is defined as
merchanting trade. To facilitate transactional services by ADs to their merchanting
traders-customers, a set of operational guidelines has been formulated as outlined
below:
(a) Regulatory instructions applicable to exports (except EXP Form) and imports
(except IMP Form) shall be complied with for export-leg and import-leg
respectively, with reporting routine on Form-C (at export-leg) and Form TM (at
import-leg). Requirement of EXP Form and IMP Form respectively for export and
import of goods will not be applicable;
(b) ADs shall satisfy themselves with the bonafides of the transactions, including
adherence to KYC and AML/CFT guidelines while handling such transactions.
The counterparties to merchanting trades shall be from FATF compliant countries.
(c) The entire merchanting trade is to be routed through the same AD. The designated
AD shall verify the documents and satisfy themselves about the genuineness of
the trade. The designated AD should, if necessary, make online verification of
transport documents (in case of goods) through acceptable tracking system;
(d) In case of the receipt of transferable LCs to execute merchanting trade, the same
may be transferred favoring suppliers of relevant countries in terms of relevant
provisions of UCP in force for procurement of goods/services to be sold to
respective customers of third countries. The payment for the procurement will be
settled in observance of the procedure laid down in UCP;

--- Page 36 ---
29

(e) In case fresh LCs from Bangladesh to suppliers abroad for import-leg are issued,
import payments need to be settled out of receipts from export-leg. Import
settlement, however, may be arranged by traders before receipts of payments from
export-leg under short term buyers' credit from external sources. Traders can
assign the receivables from export-leg for the credits. ADs shall not issue any
forms of payment undertaking/commitments/acceptance for the credits.
(f) Receipts from export-leg, on encashment of mark-up including deposit to
retention quota accounts at traders’ option, shall be retained in margin accounts
maintained in foreign exchange till the settlement of payments under import-leg
including charges. Discounted proceeds, if any realized before maturity, can also
be retained in the said margin accounts.
(2) Agency commission/service charge is allowed from the receipts of export-leg retained
in margin accounts provided that the payment does not result the transactions ending
in shortfall of settlement of payments to suppliers abroad. The agency commission is
subject to deduction and payment of applicable taxes.
(3) ADs shall satisfy themselves about merchanting traders of goods and services
regarding their overall capabilities to perform the said trade.
(4) ADs shall satisfy themselves to the effect that payments for import-leg are to be met
out of receipts from export-leg other than buyers’ credit as per 66(1)(e) above. ADs
shall, in no way, execute payments from their own sources. The difference between
inward receipts and outward payments including relevant all charges shall be
reasonably satisfactory for meeting local expenses and profits. ADs shall comply with
regulations regarding deductions of applicable taxes for the transactions.
(5) Merchanting traders will be entitled to have retention quota facility on realized
proceeds, net of outward remittances, in accordance with rate applicable for service
exports as per paragraph 76 of this circular.
(6) Reporting for merchanting trade transactions to Bangladesh Bank shall be done on
gross basis with purpose as ‘merchanting services’ at both legs.

67. Settlement of import and export transactions through counter-trade arrangements
(1) Bangladeshi parties (exporters/importers/traders) may voluntarily enter into counter-trade
arrangements with counterparts abroad for settlement of import payments into
Bangladesh against proceeds of goods exported from Bangladesh. Banks may open and
maintain Escrow accounts in relevant approved currency, with intimation to Bangladesh
Bank, in the name of foreign counterparts or jointly with Bangladeshi parties, to execute
the settlement of payments. Operational procedures for settlement of payments under
counter-trade arrangements are as follows:
(a) Credits to Escrow accounts can be made out of import payments in approved
foreign currencies received from importers through local banking channel
supported by documentary evidences.

--- Page 37 ---
30

(b) The accounts can be debited for export payments, net of permissible commission/
service charges, supported by documentary evidences to exporters through local
banking channel.
(c) Agreed commission/service charges, on deduction of applicable taxes, will be
payable to Bangladeshi parties in equivalent Taka from the Escrow accounts.
(2) No interest/profit will be payable on balances held in Escrow accounts but unencumbered
balances can be transferred, at the instructions of account holders, to other Escrow
accounts in Bangladesh for facilitating payments against exports under counter-trade
arrangements.
(3) In case of underlying agreement between parties, Escrow accounts as per authorization in
paragraph 67(1) above may be opened and maintained in Bangladeshi Taka. In this case,
import payments can be credited to the accounts against import payments received in
Taka from importers’ banks. The balances held in Taka accounts can be used for
settlement of local disbursement as per 1(b) and 1(c) above. As usual, the accounts will
bear no interest/profit.
(4) Bangladeshi parties shall follow up with their counterparts so that the position in Escrow
accounts can be balanced within periodical intervals.
(5) Subject to approval from Bangladesh Bank, Bangladeshi parties can open and maintain
Escrow accounts in the countries of their counterparts for settlement of trade transactions
under counter-trade arrangements.
(6) All imports and exports are subject to relevant regulatory compliance and shall be
competitive in price. ADs executing transactions on behalf of importers and making
payments to Escrow accounts as per above instructions shall report the same to
Bangladesh Bank in IMP Form procedures with suitable mark as ‘Counter-trade’ along
with matching formalities. Usual EXP formalities need to be observed for export
transactions including reporting of proceeds realization with suitable mark as ‘Counter-
trade’.
(7) Banks shall be satisfied with the bonafides of the underlying transactions and shall
comply with KYC and AML/CFT standards, including reporting routines to Bangladesh
Bank on related Online Systems and relevant schedule of statements.
(8) The above instructions, however, shall not be applicable for transactions through the
ACU mechanism.

--- Page 38 ---
31

Part-I
EXPORT OF CURRENCY NOTES AND COINS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE,
GOLD, SILVER, JEWELLERY AND SECURITIES ETC.
68. Definition of foreign exchange
The term foreign exchange as defined under Section 2 of the FER Act, 1947 includes
cheques, drafts, travellers' cheques, letters of credit, bills of exchange and promissory notes
expressed or drawn in foreign currency, or in Bangladesh currency but payable in foreign
currency.

69. Export of foreign exchange
(1) Any person may take out of Bangladesh with him foreign exchange issued to him by an
AD and endorsed on his passport.
(2) General permission has been granted:
(a) to the ADs to send out of Bangladesh cheques, drafts or bills of exchange which
have been acquired by them in their normal course of business and within the
terms of their authorization ; and
(b) to a foreign national who is resident in Bangladesh, but is not domiciled in
Bangladesh to take or send out of Bangladesh drafts or cheques drawn on their
foreign currency accounts.
(3) Currency which has been brought into Bangladesh in the safes of vessels or aircraft or
which has been taken on board vessel or aircraft with the permission of the Bangladesh
Bank may be taken out of Bangladesh.
(4) Any person ordinarily resident in Bangladesh may take out foreign exchange not
exceeding USD 10,000 (Ten thousand) or its equivalent which was brought in without
declaration at the time of returning from abroad.
(5) Any person not ordinarily resident in Bangladesh including Bangladesh nationals
working abroad may take out of Bangladesh any amount in foreign exchange not
exceeding the amount declared by him to the Customs Authorities on arrival in
Bangladesh. However, such a person may take out at the time of leaving Bangladesh
foreign exchange not exceeding USD 10,000 (Ten thousand) or its equivalent brought in
without declaration to the Customs Authorities on his arrival in Bangladesh.
(6) It is not permissible to send currency notes and coins out of Bangladesh by post/courier
or any other means.

70. Export of local currency
Any person may take out of Bangladesh, Bangladeshi legal tender notes and coins not
exceeding Taka 10,000 (Ten thousand) only in value at any one time.

71. Export of Securities
Under Section 13(l)(a) of the FER Act, 1947 it is not permissible for any person to take or
send out any security to any place outside Bangladesh except with permission of the
Bangladesh Bank. Residents in Bangladesh who are holders of foreign securities and who

--- Page 39 ---
32

wish to send these securities to bank, brokers or agents abroad for purposes of sale, transfer
etc., should apply to Bangladesh Bank through an AD for the necessary export permit.
Permission for transfer of foreign securities will be granted provided the AD gives an
undertaking that the securities will be received back in Bangladesh within a specified period
or in the case of sale, the foreign currency proceeds will be remitted to Bangladesh.

72. Definition of jewellery and precious stones
The terms jewellery and precious stone are deemed to include all articles made wholly or
mainly of gold, platinum, diamonds of all kinds, precious or semi-precious stones, pearls,
whether or not mounted, set or strung and articles set or mounted with diamonds, precious or
semi-precious stones or pearls.

73. Export of gold jewellery and silver jewellery
Export of gold jewellery and silver jewellery from Bangladesh may be effected by exporters
registered with the office of the CCI&E as per normal EXP procedure. Back to back import
LCs may be established by ADs for import of gold, silver and precious stones for
manufacture and export of jewellery against export LCs received by registered jewellery
exporters operating under the bonded warehouse system, subject to observance of the
minimum domestic value addition requirement prescribed in the Jewellery Export Policy
formulated by the Ministry of Commerce (10% for gold jewellery, 15% for stone- studded
gold jewellery and 25% for silver jewellery). Back to back imports may also be effected
against firm export orders in cases where import costs are met out of advances received by
the exporter from the foreign buyer, or where the import payment is settled abroad directly by
the foreign buyer.
74. Cost of imported inputs prepaid abroad
If the cost of imported inputs are prepaid abroad by the foreign buyer or met out of advances
received from the foreign buyer, exporters shall be required to repatriate export proceeds to
the extent of the local value addition only. In such cases, ADs shall maintain the records of
the total export value and the cost of imported inputs separately during the EXP reporting.

75. Export of jewellery on consignment basis
Prior permission of Bangladesh Bank will be required for export of jewellery on consignment
basis or for sale in exhibitions abroad.

--- Page 40 ---
33

Part-J
EXPORTERS' RETENTION QUOTA (ERQ) ACCOUNT

76. Retention quota limits
(1) Retention quota for merchandise exporters
Merchandise exporters are entitled to foreign exchange retention quota of 30 (thirty)
percent of the repatriated FOB value for exports of high domestic value-added
merchandise. However, for merchandise exports of goods having high import content,
such as apparels using imported woven fabric, POL products including naphtha, furnace
oil and bitumen, electronic goods, etc., the retention quota is 7.5 (Seven and a half)
percent of the repatriated FOB value.
(2) Retention quota for deemed exporters
Retention quota account may also be opened and maintained in the names of deemed
exporters for supplying inputs against inland back to back LC denominated in foreign
currency. Since foreign exchange earned from direct export is to be shared among direct
and deemed exporters, ADs are obliged to meticulous compliance with the following:

(a) the total amount credited to the direct exporter's retention quota account together
with foreign exchange paid to the deemed exporter against supply of input must not
exceed the net repatriated FOB export value of the direct exporter; and
(b) retention quota accounts can be credited up to the permissible limit in the percentage
of proceeds realized under inland back to back LCs.
(3) Retention quota for export of software, data entry/processing, and other ICT-related
services
Exporters of software, data entry/processing, and other ICT-related services may retain 35
(Thirty five) percent of net export earnings repatriated in foreign exchange in ERQ
accounts.
(4) Retention quota for other service exporters
Service exporters other than those mentioned at para (3) above may retain 30 (Thirty)
percent of their repatriated export receipts in ERQ accounts against service rendered in
non-physical form.

(5) Retention quota for agents/trade facilitators
Resident companies/firms working as agents/trade facilitators may retain 10 (Ten) percent
of the commission earning receipts from the export proceed in foreign currency, subject
to having valid permissions from competent authorities, if applicable, and are active
members of trade associations representing the relevant sectors.

However, foreign exchange earnings on account of indenting commission or agency
commission originating from Bangladesh sources cannot be credited to such accounts.

--- Page 41 ---
34

77. Eligible currency and utilization
(1) Eligible currency
Foreign exchange out of the retention quota may be maintained in foreign currency
accounts with the concerned ADs in US Dollar, Pound Sterling, Euro, Japanese Yen, or
Chinese Yuan upon realization of the export proceeds.
(2) Utilization
Balances in these accounts may be used by the exporters for bonafide business purposes,
such as business visits abroad, participation in export fairs and seminars, establishment,
and maintenance of offices abroad, import of raw materials, machinery, and spares,
repayment of authorized foreign loan, etc. without prior approval of Bangladesh Bank. In
addition, ADs on request by the IT/Software exporting firms can remit international
alliance/software registration fees, domain registration/hosting fees, server maintenance
fees, account verification/remittance test fees, etc. from the ERQ account of the applicant
without prior approval of Bangladesh Bank. Foreign exchange from the ERQ account can
be used by the exporter for investment abroad with prior approval as per Capital Account
Transaction (Overseas Equity Investment) Rules, 2022.
Transfer of unencumbered foreign currency between the ERQ accounts of the same
exporter maintained out of export receipts with different ADs is permissible for bonafide
transactions as mentioned above. Besides, funds from the ERQ accounts of the exporters
may be used for settlement of import liability and repayment of authorized foreign loans
of their subsidiaries/sister concerns. However, funds from ERQ accounts of the exporters
held at other ADs may be used for (1) settlement of import liability of the exporters and
(2) settlement of import liability & repayment of authorized foreign loan of exporters'
subsidiaries/sister concerns under compliance with the following instructions:

(a) Fund transferring AD
ADs shall be satisfied that the fund will be used only for imports and repayment of
foreign loans of the exporters or their subsidiaries/sister concerns by other ADs and the
fund is unencumbered.
Transfer will be executed by BB-RTGS System through Bangladesh Bank clearing
accounts of ADs. This instruction shall not be applicable for fund transfers and
receipts in the same AD.
(b) Fund receiving AD
ADs shall retain the fund in the margin account till the settlement of import
payments and repayment of foreign loans.
ADs shall settle the import payments in compliance with the Import Policy Order in
force, foreign exchange regulations, and other import related instructions. For
repayment of foreign loans, concerned instructions mentioned about borrowing
abroad by residents and the loan approval letter of the competent authority shall
have to be followed.

--- Page 42 ---
35

(3) Term deposit and interest thereon
Foreign exchange out of ERQ account may also be kept as interest bearing renewable
term deposits with the concerned ADs in Bangladesh in US Dollar, Pound Sterling, Euro,
Japanese Yen, or Chinese Yuan with minimum balances of USD 2,000 (two thousand) or
its equivalent. Periods of such term deposits may be determined in accordance with
normal banking practices/normal banking considerations. Interest on such deposits may
be allowed at rates comparable to the prevailing euro deposit rates for the relevant
currency.
(4) Advance payment against import using ERQ accounts
ADs may effect advance payment not exceeding USD 25,000 (twenty five thousand) or
its equivalent from the ERQ account against bonafide business purposes provided the
relevant contract/proforma invoice stipulates for such payment subject to the following
terms and conditions:
(a) The ADs shall have to be satisfied that repayment guarantee is not obtainable
from the supplier against the remittance to be made in advance;
(b) IPO in force shall have to be meticulously followed;
(c) The ADs shall, at their own responsibility, have to arrange for repatriation of the
remittance made in advance in case the entry of goods into the country is not
effected within the stipulated time;
(d) While opening back to back LC, the ADs should adjust the value of advance
payment to ensure that the value addition requirement as stipulated in the IPO is
not breached; and
(e) Before effecting the advance payment, the ADs must obtain Form of Undertaking
(Appendix-14) duly signed by the importer.
(5) Outward remittance without balances held in ERQ accounts
ADs may allow remittance facilities to exporters for bonafide service payments to
beneficiary’s bank account abroad up to USD 5,000 or equivalent, subject to observance
of the following instructions:
(a) The facility will be useable provided that adequate funds is not available in ERQ
account;
(b) Requests from the exporter are supported by invoices specifying details of
services and deduction & payment of applicable taxes thereon;
(c) The foreign exchange so remitted under this facility shall be adjusted with
subsequent export proceeds by deduction from retainable amount in ERQ/margin
account and encashment the same in Taka account of the exporter.

78. International card
International cards may be issued to the exporters against balances held in ERQ and ARQ
accounts. The arrangements for issuance of international cards and use thereof by exporters
are described in chapter 19 of GFET-2018 and subsequent circulars.

--- Page 43 ---
36

Part-K
FOREIGN CURRENCY ACCOUNTS FOR ENTERPRISES
OPERATING IN SPECIALIZED ZONES

79. Disposal of proceeds: The following procedures shall apply to release of foreign
exchange to the enterprises against exports made from specialized zones:

(1) 100 (hundred) percent of repatriated export proceeds of a Type A industrial enterprises in
specialized zones may be retained in foreign currency accounts in the name of the enterprises
with ADs or OBUs in Bangladesh. Balances in foreign currency accounts may freely be used
to meet all foreign payment obligations including import payment obligations of the
enterprise and payment obligations in foreign exchange to respective zone authorities.
Balances from foreign currency accounts will also be freely encashable for local
disbursements or for crediting Taka account maintained with ADs for meeting Taka payment
obligations like wages, rents, rates, taxes etc. Taka accounts maintained with ADs by Type A
enterprises in specialized zones may be credited only with encashments of funds from foreign
currency accounts or of other inward remittances from abroad. However, receipts from Taka
sales of factory refuses and of unusable portion of raw materials of Type A enterprise may be
credited to Taka accounts provided the permission letter of respective zone authorities for the
sale and evidence of payment of duties/taxes on sale proceeds are produced to the AD. In
addition, ADs may credit legitimate receipts against short weight claim, quality claim, freight
charge of sample, insurance claims, reimbursement of expenses for samples from buyers or
parents etc. received in foreign currency or local currency accounts of the enterprises. ADs
shall observe due diligence in compliance with KYC, AML/CFT standards while crediting
accounts under the above mentioned grounds based on documentary evidences. Balances in
these Taka accounts cannot be converted to foreign exchange and may only be used for
meeting local expenses.

(2) Balances held in foreign currency accounts of Type A industrial enterprises of specialized
zone may be used for purchase of shares in zone areas or outside zone areas in Bangladesh.
ADs receiving funds on account of share purchase shall observe all instructions including
issuance of certificate and reporting routine contained in chapter 9 of GFET-2018 and its
subsequent circulars. As such, dividend income out of such investment, and disinvestment
proceeds (if any) approved by Bangladesh Bank, where required, may also be credited to
their foreign currency accounts, subject to regulatory compliances including taxes
regulations.

(3) Up to 80 (eighty) percent of the repatriated export proceeds of Type B and Type C
enterprises other than those in the garments sector may be retained in foreign currency
accounts maintained in the names of the enterprises with their ADs; for a Type B or Type C
enterprise in the garments sector, up to 75 (seventy five) percent of the repatriated export
proceeds may be credited to foreign currency accounts maintained in the name of the

--- Page 44 ---
37

enterprises with ADs. The remainder of the export proceeds should be encashed to taka at the
prevailing exchange rate. Besides, Taka accounts of Type B and Type C industrial enterprises
may also be credited with authorized payment received in Taka in accordance with same
instructions as stipulated in paragraph 79(1) above. All foreign payment obligations of Type
B and Type C enterprises including import payment and repayments of foreign loans may be
met out of the balances in their foreign currency accounts; payment obligations in foreign
exchange of a type B enterprise to respective zone authority may also be settled from
balances in its foreign currency account. Balances in foreign currency accounts of Type B
and Type C enterprises are freely encashable to Taka for local disbursements.

(4) Equity from foreign shareholders of Type A and B enterprises and authorized loan
received in foreign currency by Type A, B and C enterprises may be credited in foreign
currency accounts of enterprises of specialized zones. Issuance of shares to foreign
shareholders is subject to compliance with the provisions of chapter 9 of GFET-2018 and its
subsequent circulars.

(5) To facilitate business travel abroad by the officials of enterprises located in specialized
zones, balances of such accounts may be used through international debit/pre-paid cards also
as per relevant provision of chapter 19 of GFET-2018 and subsequent circulars.

--- Page 45 ---
FE Circular No. 31, dated July 31, 2025

Part-L
APPENDIX
Part-A: GENERAL GUIDELINES

Appendix-1
EXP Form

Appendix-2
Export Register

Appendix-3
Certificate of AD for carrier company

Appendix-4
Information relating to export orders with foreign agent
commission

Appendix-5
Application for approving remittance of discount on account
of readymade garments and leather goods

Appendix-6
Advance receipt voucher

Appendix-7
PRC Direct Export

Appendix-8
PRC Deemed Export
Part-D: EXPORT UNDER OPEN ACCOUNT CREDIT TERMS

Appendix-9
Certificate of AD for carrier company
Part-E: EXPORT OF SERVICES INCLUDING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
ENABLED SERVICES

Appendix-10
Form-C

Appendix-11
Form-C (ICT)
Part-F: EXPORT PROCEED REALIZATION SERVICES

Appendix-12
Certificate by AD against IT related services
Part-H: RE-EXPORT, ENTRE-POT, MERCHANTING TRADE AND COUNTER TRADE

Appendix-13
Form TM
Part-K: EXPORTERS' RETENTION QUOTA (ERQ) ACCOUNT

Appendix-14
Form of Undertaking

--- Page 46 ---
Paragraph 6, Part-A
Appendix-1
EXP Form
(Submitted electronically by exporters)

Statutory declaration to be furnished by exporters under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947
before shipment of goods. An incorrect declaration constitutes offence under the said Act.
EXP/Electronic Declaration No. and date_______________________________________________________
Name and address of Authorized Dealer _______________________________________________________

Details of export
Sl.
No.
Items
Particulars (to be filled
in by Exporter)
Code No. (to be filled in by
Authorized Dealer)

Commodity to be exported






Country of destination






Port of destination






Quantity
Unit (bales/tons/lbs. etc.)






Volume (Weight/number etc.)






Value
Currency






Incoterm Used






Invoice Value

FOB
Insurance
Freight



CMT Value (if applicable)






Terms of sale (Firm Contract/LC or Consignment
sale)






Name & address of importer/consignee






Name of carrying vessel






Bill of Lading/Railway Receipt/Airway
Bill/Truck Receipt/Post Parcel Receipt
No.:
Date:





10.
Port of shipment/Post Office of despatch






11.
Land Custom Post






12.
Shipment date






13.
Name of the Exporter (in block letter) with
address







14.
CCI&E’s Registration Number of the exporter
and date






15.
Sector (Public or Private) under which the
exporter falls






Declaration and undertaking by exporter
I/We, the undersigned hereby declare that I/we am/are the sellers/consignors of the goods described above in respect of
which this electronic declaration is made out through Bangladesh Bank online reporting portal and that the particulars given in
this electronic form are true and that the invoice value declared in the form in case of firm contract is full value as contracted
with the buyers; and in case of consignment sale, is a fair value of the goods which are being shipped on consignment sale.

I/We do hereby undertake to repatriate full proceeds of the export within the period specified by Bangladesh Bank in terms
of FER Act.

Date_________________
Authorized Signature and
Stamp of Exporter
Certificate of Authorized Dealer
Certified that the above exporter(s) is/are known to us, that he/they is/are bonafide business person(s) in Bangladesh, and
that he/they has/have made arrangements with us for the realization of the export proceeds of the goods shipped from
Bangladesh as per their electronic declaration within the stipulated period and that we are satisfied with the said
arrangements. We have also satisfied ourselves with the bonafides of the importers/consignees abroad and their credentials
etc.

*We undertake that for export shipments on consignment sale, we shall obtain from the exporter(s) and furnish to the
Bangladesh Bank a fully documented account sale certified by the consignees/Chamber of Commerce of the country of
import.

*We further undertake that in the event of non-realization or short realization of export proceeds against shipment within the
stipulated period, we shall obtain from the exporter(s) and furnish to the Bangladesh Bank full explanation as to the
circumstances resulting in non-realization/short realization.

*(Strike out the portion not applicable and authenticate with initials).

Date_________________
Stamp and Signature of
Authorized Dealer

--- Page 47 ---
Paragraph 11, Part-A

Appendix-2
EXPORT REGISTER
SI
Number of
Name and address
Commodity
Amount declared on
Date of
Initials of
Date of
Bill No.
No.
EXP Form
of the exporter
EXP Form
certification
the certifying
shipment
officials
Date of negotiation or
sending abroad for collection
of export proceeds
Date of reporting of
shipping information to
BB online

Date of
realization
Amount realized in
foreign currency
Taka amount paid
to the exporter and
rate of exchange applied

Date of reporting of
realization to BB online
10
11
12
13
14
15

--- Page 48 ---
Paragraph 14(4), Part-A
Appendix-3

CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORIZED DEALER TO BE PRODUCED
BY THE EXPORTER TO CARRIER COMPANY


CERTIFIED THAT shipment against EXP Form No.…................................................................
dated......................................... by M/s. ...........................................................................................
(Name and address of the exporter)
to M/s...............................................................................................................................................
(Name and address of the importer or designated party as per LC/valid contract)
is being made against full payment received in advance by us and there is no objection for bill of
lading, airway bill, railway receipt, and other documents of title to cargo being drawn to the order
of...............................




Signature of the Authorized Official:
Full Name:
Designation:
Phone No.


Seal: Date:

--- Page 49 ---
Paragraph 19(1), Part-A
Appendix-4

--- Page 50 ---
Paragraph 19(4), Part-A
Appendix-5

APPLICATION FOR APPROVING REMITTANCE OF DISCOUNT

ON ACCOUNT OF READYMADE GARMENTS AND LEATHER GOODS
Part -1

(i) Name and address of the exporter: ........................................................................................................

(ii) Particulars of discount allowed to the same exporter in last 3 years : ..................................................

Export LC/
Export
Amount/
Amount of
Discount
Sl. No.
contract No
Bill Value
Value of
Discount
Allowing
Rate of
& Value
Repatriation
Allowed
Authority
Discount
and Date

3. Export performance of the same exporter in last 3 years:

Sl. No.
Export LC/
Export Bill
EXP No
Invoice No
Realised
Amount of
Contract No
No. & Date
& Date
& Value
Value
Discount
& Value

Part -2: Required information to be submitted with supporting documents/necessary papers:

Reason(s) for claiming discount by foreign buyer(s) and particulars of correspondences with the
buyer(s);
(ii)
Number, date, and value of Back to Back LC(s);
(iii)
Date of receiving of imported goods, bill no, bill date, and bill value;
(iv)
Amount of import liability and date of payment;
No. of master export LC & date, value and date of shipment, etc.
(vi)
Quantity of exported Readymade Garments and invoice value;
(vii)
New sales price if goods are proposed to be sold to a new buyer;
(viii)
Amount and rate of discount claimed on consignment/bill basis
(ix)
Name, address, and particulars of license/registration of the Buying House and Freight Forwarder.

--- Page 51 ---
Paragraph 21, Part-A
Appendix-6

--- Page 52 ---
Paragraph 27(1), Part-A

Appendix-7

--- Page 53 ---
Paragraph 27(1), Part-A

Appendix-8

--- Page 54 ---
Paragraph 43, Part-D
Appendix-9

--- Page 55 ---
Paragraph 50(3), Part-E
Appendix-10

FORM-C
DECLARATION FOR REMITTANCE RECEIVED FROM FOREIGN
COUNTRY OF AMOUNT EXCEEDING USD 20,000 OR EQUIVALENT

I/We do hereby declare that I/we have received remittance of


(Amount and Currency in figures and in words)
remitted or
to be remitted by
on account of
(name and address of remitting bank)

for the purpose of
name and address of remitter)
(purpose of remittance)
(Name of Applicant)
Nationality
Date .....................
Address
Signature and Stamp of the applicant

From-C : Inward Remittance exceeding USD 20,000 (Twenty thousand) or equivalent.

Month
Country of Ordering
Purpose
Amount in
Customers
(State Currency)

Coded by

Checked by


Purpose of remittance

We hereby certify that we are satisfied as to the identity of the applicant and that we have seen
documentary evidence which satisfies us as to the bonafides of the declaration made on this form.



Date ...........................

Signature and Stamp of the
Authorised Dealer





Contd, P/2

--- Page 56 ---
Page-2

(Space for use by the Bangladesh Bank)
BANGLADESH BANK
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Diate oes Assistant Director

Note: Full details must be given for all remittances which are of capital nature. In the case of amounts
for mvestment in Bangladesh in shares or business, the reasons why the investment is required must be
clearly indicated. In the case of the remittance of the sale proceeds of securities the name of the true

ADCode| Ref Year AD Code) Ref ‘Year

--- Page 57 ---
Paragraph 50(3), Part-E
Appendix-11


FORM-C(ICT)

DECLARATION FOR INWARD REMITTANCE ON ACCOUNT OF ICT
RELATED SERVICES OF AMOUNT EXCEEDING USD 20,000 OR EQUIVALENT

I/We do hereby declare that I/we have received remittance of ………………… (amount) which is a fair
value against ICT related services described below in respect of which this declaration is made out and
that the particulars given below are true:

a) Remitter's name and address:
b) Remitting bank and address:
c) Reference No (contract/invoice/electronic communication etc.)
d) Purpose (please tick):

 Information Technology Enabled Services (IT Enabled Services) and Business Process
 Outsourcing (BPO) services-code 2410
 Computer and Information Technology consultancy and management services-code 2411
 Export of computer software including turn-key basis (customized)-code 2412
 Export of computer software including turn-key basis (non-customized) - code 2413
 Installation services concerning hardware and software maintenance and repairs of computers and
peripheral equipment services - code 2414
 ………………………… (please specify

Note: Please see the "Code lists for Reporting of External Sector transactions by the Authorised dealers"
for explanatory notes of above purposes

Signature with name of applicant: …………………………………………………………………………..
Address:……………………………………………………………………………………………………...
Date:………………………………………………………………………………………………………….

(for AD's use only)
Month
Country of ordering
customer
Purpose

Amount in
(state currency)






















Inward ID
AD Code
Ref.
Year


Coded by: …………………………….

Checked by: ………………………….

Purpose of remittance: ……………….


Signature and stamp of Authorized Dealer:
Date:
Outward Reference
AD Code
Ref.
Year

--- Page 58 ---
Paragraph 59(5), Part-F
Appendix-12

--- Page 59 ---
Paragraph 65(3), Part-H
Appendix-13

--- Page 60 ---
Page-2

(a) That live recognise that im the event of any misrepresentation or suppression of any matenial fact,
foreign country/countnes for
*(7) my/our living and travelling expenses for business purposes.
*(1) nry/our enroute expenses for travel abroad.
(c) We amare aware that exchange issued to me/us under this form for travel purposes may only
(d) That if the travel has not been undertaken for the purpose mentioned above, or if any unspent
utilised for the purpose for which it was granted, will be sold by me/us to an Authorised Dealer in
*(e) 1 We declare that the payment mentioned agaist 'b’ above is due to be made by me/us for which
evidence is enclosed and assume full responsibility for complying with the

documentary
provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 and mules, orders and directives issued
thereunder.

Signature of the applicant

Certificate of approval of the Bangladesh Bank (if required).
(Valid for 30 (thirty) days from the date of approval]

Date of approval. Seal & Signature of the Bangladesh Bank Official
(Certificate by Authorised Dealer)
*(a) We have issued Notes & Coms লিলি oh] Cee | | Caen
Total... .. আও per Bangladesh Bank approval dated_.... - and

endorsed the amount released in the traveller's passport after examining the ticket covering the passage.

--- Page 61 ---
Page-3

Cage to be completed by Authorised Dealer indicating Code No. as per Code list circulated by the
Bangladesh Bank.

Signature and Stamp of the
Authorised Dealer

[। we hereby certify having recerved the exchange issued to me/us as above.

Signature(s) of the Applicant(s}

* Strike out items not applicable

--- Page 62 ---
Paragraph 77(4), Part-J
Appendix-14

BANGLADESH BANK

FOREIGN EXCHANGE POLICY DEPARTMENT

FORM OF UNDERTAKING


(To be furnished by the importer for making advance remittances for permissible imports of goods
and services).

In
consideration
of
Bangladesh
Bank
permitting
me/us
an
advance

remittance
of................................to..........................................................
I/we hereby undertake that the
amount so remitted by me/us will be used solely for the purpose of payment for the goods/services
described below to be imported into Bangladesh from ....................................in accordance with the
regulations in force regarding such imports. I/We declare that the goods/services will be imported by
me/us on or about............................. and I/we undertake to produce to the Bangladesh Bank
documentary evidence in respect of goods/services so imported including the authenticated copy of
the Customs Bill of Entry for goods and supplier's invoice in original. I/We further declare that the
amount paid by me/us in advance will be deducted from the invoice value of the goods
(CFR)/services imported and that the deduction will be shown on the invoice.

I/We do undertake to be held fully responsible under FER Act, 1947 if I/We fail to produce to the
Bangladesh Bank documentary evidence in respect of service or the Exchange Control Copy of the
Customs Bill of Entry in respect of goods in original within the stipulated time or bring back the
remitted foreign currency into Bangladesh as the case may be.

Name and address
Invoice Value
Description
Country of
Particulars of
of the supplier
origin
L.C. Authoriza-
tion Form
Goods Services
Goods Services
Goods Services
Goods Services

Signature and Stamp of the
Importer

Name of the Importer


Address


Registration Number with CCI & E



Date
Signature and Stamp of the