--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd


FE Circular No.21 Date: June 17, 2025


All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Release of foreign exchange against cost of advertisement

Please refer to paragraph 33, chapter 10 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions-2018 (Vol-1), read with FE Circular Letter No. 20, dated September 08, 2015 in
terms of which Authorized dealers (ADs) are allowed to effect remittances towards cost of
advertisement of Bangladeshi products in foreign media, inter alia.

02. In practice, ADs exercise the authorization for effecting remittances on behalf of
resident entities circulating advertisements in foreign media. To facilitate transactions, it has
been decided that ADs may effect remittances on behalf of their advertisement agency-customers
circulating advertisements in foreign media for resident entities. In this context, ADs shall obtain
applications containing the followings:

(a) Copy of valid agreements;
(b) Copy of invoices;
(c) Statements showing surplus position after deduction of (i) remittable amount, (ii) taxes,
(iii) other expenses, etc. from gross collection, pertaining to the relevant transactions;
(d) Documentary evidences in support of deduction and payment of all applicable taxes;
(e) An undertaking from the applicant to the effect that, in case of wrong or excess
remittance, the amount remitted will be repatriated to Bangladesh immediately on demand.

03. ADs shall effect payments upon satisfying relevant statements. ADs shall also ensure
that remittable fund is arranged from respective collections.

04. Transactions under the authorization shall be executed by one AD bank branch
nominated by remitters. For any intended change in this respect, the relevant files shall be
transferred direct to the concerned new AD branch on written request by remitters.



Cont’d to page -2

--- Page 2 ---
05. As usual, ADs shall comply with Section 3(4) of FER Act, 1947, including observance
of due diligence with regards to KYC and AML/CFT standards, reporting routine to Bangladesh
Bank, preserve customer-wise documents and so on.

Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of your relevant clientele.


Yours faithfully,


(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123