--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd


FE Circular No. 23 Date: June 19, 2025

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,
Remittances against current account transactions

Please refer to paragraph 27, chapter 10 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions-2018 (Vol-1), FE Circular No. 50 of November 19, 2020 and FE Circular No. 01 of
January 04, 2021 regarding outward remittances up to 1(one) percent of annual sales as declared in
the previous year's income tax return of the respective remitter-companies or USD 100,000
whichever is higher. In terms of this framework, ADs may effect legitimate remittances on behalf of
industrial enterprises and service sector industries as per Industrial Policy in force.

02. It has been decided that the above-mentioned authorization shall be applicable for
bonafide current payments by all sectors under the prevailing Industrial Policy, excluding banks and
financial institutions such as finance companies, insurance companies, capital market
intermediaries, micro finance institutions, etc.

03. While processing remittances, ADs shall satisfy themselves that the cases are not
remittable under specific authorization. The authority as per 2 above does not waive the
requirements of consent, if any, from competent authorities. Accordingly, ADs shall ensure before
effecting remittances that such consent has duly been issued in favor of respective remitters. As
usual, ADs shall dispose requests for remittances on account of royalty, technical
knowledge/technical know-how fee, technical assistance fee and franchise fee under the Guidelines
of the Bangladesh Investment Development Authority circulated through FE Circular Letter No. 07
of April 11, 2021.

Other applicable instructions shall remain unchanged. Please bring the contents of this
circular to the notice of relevant clientele.


Yours faithfully,



(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123