--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd
FE Circular No.22






Date: June 18, 2025

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Outward remittances on account of project related expenses

In terms of paragraph 1, chapter 5 of Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions-2018
(GFET), Vol-1, Bangladesh Bank accommodates bonafide requests, beyond the indicative
authorization, for payment transfer under current international transactions. Accordingly,
applications from Authorized Dealers (ADs) on account of current transfers relating to
Government projects are considered by Bangladesh Bank on case to case basis in exercise of
powers vested under Section 5(1)(a) of the FER Act, 1947 (amended up to 2015).

02. To facilitate transactions for implementation of the Government projects, general
authorization is hereby accorded to designated ADs for effecting remittances on account of
consultancy fees, management fees and other relevant current service fees; subject to observance
of the following instructions:

(a) The concerned projects shall have duly been approved by the competent authorities of
the Government, including financial authorization;
(b) There shall have agreements with the beneficiaries abroad;
(c) Every request for remittance shall be supported by invoices from the beneficiaries
abroad and certificate from the project authorities regarding receipt of concerned
services;
(d) Taxes regulations regarding payment of tax at source, value added taxes and other
levies applicable on bill value need to be complied with.

03. Outward remittances in accordance with the above authorizations shall be effected by
AD branches designated by the project authorities/project implementing entities. AD branches
shall, being designated, intimate it to Bangladesh Bank before execution of remittances.
04. Remittances on account of royalty, fees for technical knowledge or technical assistance
and franchise fees to foreign persons or institutes are subject to compliance with the Guidelines
(cf. FE Circular Letter No. 07 dated April 11, 2021) issued by Bangladesh Investment
Development Authority.

05. As usual, ADs shall comply with Section 3(4) of FER Act, 1947, including observance
of due diligence of KYC, AML/CFT standards, reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank and so on.

Please bring the contents of this circular, effective immediately, to the notice of your
concerned clientele.

Yours faithfully,


(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123