--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd
FE Circular No. 24






Date: June 25, 2025

All Offshore Banking Units and
Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Scheduled Commercial Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Extending the purview of offshore banking operations

Please refer to FE Circular No. 11 of January 30, 2025 regarding the Guidelines for Offshore
Banking Business of Scheduled Commercial Banks in Bangladesh. The guidelines outline operations
of Offshore Banking Units (OBUs), among others.

02. To widen the scope of operations, it has been decided that OBUs may extend services to
non-resident customers maintaining accounts with them, including but not limited to trade related
services like advising, collection, settlements, etc., subject to the observance of the following points:

(a) OBUs shall satisfy themselves about the legitimacy of the relevant services to be provided
to non-resident customers;
(b) No exposure/financial commitment can be undertaken on behalf of respective customers;
(c) Appropriate due diligence needs to be executed before effecting transactions.

03. OBUs are allowed to arrange repatriation of inward remittances for credit in customers’
accounts through internationally recognized money transfer operators, online payment gateway
service providers (OPGSPs), digital wallets/card schemes or other payment service providers
licensed by competent authorities abroad. Accordingly, OBUs should have suitable arrangements in
foreign currency with operators abroad. Under the arrangements, only funds need to be repatriated to
credit in customers’ accounts. OBUs shall, however, immediately transfer foreign currency to
beneficiaries’ banks through BD-RTGS system in case of repatriated funds belonging to customers
maintaining accounts with other OBUs/DBUs.

04. This directive has been issued by Bangladesh Bank in exercise of the powers conferred on
it under Section 11(7) and Section 25(2) of the Offshore Banking Act, 2024.

Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of all concerned.


Yours faithfully,


(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123