--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 38







Date: October 05, 2025

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,
Remittance facilities to SMEs

Bangladesh Bank recognizes the rapid growth of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) sector as
significant contributors to national economy. As a part to promote the sector, it has been decided that
Authorized Dealers (ADs) may permit an annual remittance facility of up to 3,000 US dollar or equivalent
to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) for meeting bonafide current expenses abroad. Such remittances
may be made through traditional banking channels or card channels. In this regard, ADs shall adhere to
the following instructions:

(a) ADs shall ensure that the SME is duly registered with SME Foundation;
(b) For online bonafide current payments by SMEs, ADs may issue refillable international cards
(credit/debit/pre-paid card – termed as SME Card as a generic name) with 600 US dollar or equivalent to
the nominated official of the enterprise within the limit. The combined total of card refills and remittances
through banking channels shall not exceed 3,000 US dollar or equivalent within a calendar year;
(c) Outward remittances related to royalty, technical knowledge/know-how fees, technical
assistance fees, and franchise fees will be governed by the guidelines of BIDA (paragraph 47(2) of FE
Circular 37, dated September 30, 2025). The authorization under this circular does not apply to these
purposes.

02. Transactions under this authorization shall be executed by a single AD bank branch nominated
by the remitter. Any request to change AD branch shall be submitted in writing by the respective
enterprise, and relevant files shall be transferred directly to the new branch.

03. ADs shall exercise customer’s due diligence, including deduction and payments of applicable
taxes at sources, VAT and other levies, adherence to KYC norms, AML/CFT standards, reporting routine
to Bangladesh Bank and so on.

You are advised to bring the contents of this circular, effective immediately, to the notice of
respective SME clientele.

Yours faithfully,



(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123