--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 37






Date: September 30, 2025

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,

Foreign exchange regulations regarding outward remittances on account of
current account transactions other than imports and transportation services

Foreign exchange transactions on outward remittances are regulated by the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act (FER), 1947 and subsequent circulars issued thereagainst. To bring
ease in conducting outward remittances on account of current account transactions other than
imports and transportation services, the existing regulations have been compiled at one place
with modifications as necessitated. Accordingly, relevant instructions in this regard contained in
the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions-2018 (GFET) and its subsequent circulars will
stand repealed with issuance of this circular excepting monthly reporting instructions contained
in GFET, Vol-2.

02. This circular is issued with the authority vested to Bangladesh Bank under Section
20(3) of FER Act, 1947.

03. The instructions of this circular will remain valid for one year from the date of its
issuance. However, instructions to be issued within this period will be read with this circular.

Please bring the contents of this comprehensive circular to the notice of your constituents.






Encl. As stated.

Yours faithfully,


(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123

--- Page 2 ---
Contents
Part-A: OUTWARD REMITTANCES



Pages
General…………………………………………………………………………
Reporting forms………………………………………………………………..
Application……………………………………………………………………..
Dealing with approved applications……………………………………………
Permission for recurring remittances…………………………………………...
Period of validity of Bangladesh Bank's approval……………………………..
Disposal of application forms…………………………………………………..
Cancellation of outward remittances…………………………………………...

Part-B: TRAVEL


Release of foreign exchange for travel abroad…………………………………
10.
Release of foreign exchange for travel on health ground……………………….
11.
Official or semi-official visits by employees of government/ autonomous semi-
autonomous bodies……………………………………………………………

12.
Release of foreign exchange for attending seminar, conference, workshop,
training, etc. abroad……..………………………………………………………

13.
Release of foreign exchange by debiting convertible Taka account for travel
abroad…………………………………………………………………………..

14.
Issue of foreign exchange currency notes to foreign nationals..…………..…….
15.
Business travel quota entitlements for exporters, manufacturers for domestic
markets and importers…………...……………………………………………

16.
Disposal of unspent foreign exchange by returning residents………………...
17.
Reconversion of unspent Taka into foreign exchange by foreign
tourists……………………………………………………………………….…

18.
Release of foreign exchange for Hajj………………………………………..…
19.
Release of foreign exchange for Umrah Hajj…………………………..………
10

Part-C: PRIVATE REMITTANCES


20.
Transfer of assets of foreign nationals retiring from Bangladesh………………
11
21.
Retirement benefits, etc…………………………………………………………
11
22.
Application and supporting documentation……………………………………..
11
23.
Reporting…………………………………………………………………….......
13
24.
Investments by foreign nationals in certificates/securities etc…………………..
13
25.
Remittance of sales proceeds of real assets……………………………………..
13
26.
Legacies and other distribution of assets from the estates of deceased persons...
14
27.
Family remittance facility……………………………………………………….
14
28.
Membership fees, fees for application, registration, admission, examination,
etc………………………………………………………………………….…..

16

--- Page 3 ---
ii

29.
Release of foreign exchange for study abroad…………………………………..
17
30.
Remittance on account of correspondence courses……………………………..
20
31.
Remittance of Consular fees…………………………………………………….
20
32.
Remittance of visa fee abroad…………………………………………………...
20
33.
Remittance of immigration visa processing fees, evaluation fees, right of
landing fee……………………………………………………………………….

21
34.
Remittance for professional/skilled category employment abroad and
immigration………………………………………..………..…………………...

21
35.
Remittance for family maintenance abroad by residents………………………..
22
36.
Registration/participation fee for attending training, seminar, workshop abroad
22
37.
Remittance towards publication related fees of articles in international journals
23
38.
Remittance of IT Expenses through Virtual Cards (debit, credit or pre-paid)…..
23
39.
Trading at Border Haats…………………………………………………………
24
40.
Other private remittances………………………………………………………..
24

Part-D: REMITTANCES – PROFITS AND DIVIDENDS


41.
Remittance of profit of branches of foreign firms other than financial
institutions……………………………………………………………………….

25
42.
Remittance of profit of banks, insurance companies and other financial
institutions……………….……………………………………………………....

27
43.
Head office expenses……………………………………………………………
28
44.
Remittance of dividend to non-resident shareholders…………………………...
29
45.
Outward remittances on account of service payments by subsidiaries of foreign
Companies……………………………………………………………………….

31

Part-E: INSTITUTIONAL REMITTANCES


46.
Remittance of cost of training, consultancy services and other fees……………
33
47.
Application of Bangladesh Investment Development Authority Act, 2016 for
payment of royalty, fees for technical knowledge or technical assistance and
franchise fees to foreign persons or institutes…………………………………...


33
48.
Outward remittances on account of payment of royalty, fees for technical
knowledge or technical assistance and franchise fees…………………………..

34
49.
Remittance on account of royalty, technical know-how and technical
assistance fees for DPAs of EZs:……………………………………………...

34
50.
Employment of overseas agents, etc…………………………………………..
35
51.
Opening of branches abroad…………………………………………………….
35
52.
Advertisement of Bangladeshi products in mass media abroad………………...
36
53.
Remittance of aircraft lease rental by airlines incorporated in Bangladesh…….
37
54.
Outward remittances on account of bandwidth/internet and related service import…
38
55.
Software maintenance/support fees……………………………………………..
38
56.
Remittance for academic/research journal subscription………………………...
39
57.
Registration fee on account of medical check-up for migrant workers…………
39

--- Page 4 ---
iii

58.
Subscriptions to foreign media services………………………………………...
40
59.
Remittance on account of legal expenses of banks……………………………... 41
60.
General Average Payment………………………………………………………
41
61.
Outward remittances on account of project related expenses…………………... 42
62.
Membership fee to foreign professional and scientific institutions…………….. 43
63.
Remittance facilities to IT/software firms………………………………………
43
64.
Remittance facilities to e-Commerce firms……………………………………..
43
65.
Outward remittance of commission earnings of 'foreign brokerage firm'
against service rendered to foreign portfolio investors in Bangladesh………….

44
66.
Remittances for webinar solution services……………………………………...
45
67-68.
Mobile operators’ receipt of roaming bills in Taka and corresponding outward
Remittances……………………………………………………………………...
45
69.
Outward remittance by local satellite channel distributor to principal abroad…. 46
70.
Remittances on account of DTH (Direct to Home)……………………………..
47
71.
Sales of foreign digital items through local e-Commerce market places/platforms..
48

Part-F: EXPORT CLAIMS


72.
Remittances against export claims……………………………………………… 49
73.
Remittances in settlement of commercial claims……………………………...
49
74.
Reporting……………………………………………………………………......
50
75-76.
Required documents…………………………………………………………….
50
77.
Other type of export claims……………………………………………..
52
78.
Claim settlement under marine insurance policies……………………………...
52

Part-G: INSURANCE BUSINESS


79.
General………………………………………………………………………….. 54
80.
Life insurance…………………………………………………………………...
54
81.
Payments of claims……………………………………………………………...
54
82.
The foreign currency policy abroad…………………………………………….. 55
83.
Export of policies……………………………………………………………….. 55
84-87.
Non-Life Business………………………………………………………………
55
88.
Method of settlement of claim (non-life business) …………………………….. 57

Part-H: REINSURANCE


89.
General………………………………………………………………………….. 58
90.
Reinsurance-life: remittance of premia………………………………………..
58

--- Page 5 ---
iv

Part-I: PAYMENT THROUGH INTERNATIONAL CARDS


91.
International cards………………………………………………………………. 59
92.
Instructions relating to issuance of international cards …………………..…….. 59
93.
Use of international cards for travels outside Bangladesh……………………...
63
94.
Other instructions……………………………………………………………….
64
95.
Reporting………………………………………………………………………..
65

Part-J: USE OF CARD PLATFORMS AS PAYMENT CHANNEL

96.
Permissible outward remittances through card platform………………………..
66
97.
Observances by ADs……………………………………………………………
67




APPENDICES

Appendix-1
Form TM

Appendix-2
Form C

Appendix-3
Application form for foreign exchange for medical treatment abroad

Appendix-4
Application for transfer of capital/saving of foreign nationals retiring
permanently from Bangladesh

Appendix-5

Form of application for private remittance by foreign nationals to countries
abroad

Appendix-6

Application for foreign exchange for studies abroad
Appendix-7

Application for payment of fees for correspondence course
Appendix-8

Notifications on foreign exchange transactions at Border Haats
Appendix-9

Application for remittance of dividends to non-resident shareholders
Appendix-10

Particulars of foreign branch office opened by a company/firm resident in
Bangladesh

Appendix-11

Settlement of non-life claims
Appendix-12

List of papers/documents to be submitted by local stock brokerage firm to
AD

--- Page 6 ---
Appendix-13

Statement showing commission/service charges payable to foreign stock
brokerage firm (principal) abroad and settled thereagainst

Appendix-14

Half yearly consolidated statement showing commission/service charges
payable to foreign stock brokerage firm (principal abroad) and settled
thereagainst

Appendix-15

Declaration made by satellite channel distributor
Appendix-16

Application for remittance of export claims
Appendix-17

Declaration to be made by policy holders for remittance of premia towards
life assurance policies expressed in foreign currencies

Appendix-18

Facultative/re-insurance-business (premia)
Appendix-19

Treaty re-insurance business settlement of account
Appendix-20

Monthly statement of international card




ENCLOSURE

Enclosure-A
Guidelines for Outward Remittance Repatriation for Payment of Royalty,
Technical Knowledge/Technical Know-how Fee(s), Technical Assistance
Fee(s), and Franchise Fee(s)-2020

--- Page 7 ---
Part-A
OUTWARD REMITTANCES

1. General

(1) Barring a few remittances of special nature, most outward remittances either in its entirety or
up to a certain limit set by Bangladesh Bank may be approved by Authorized Dealers (ADs),
following declaration of Taka as convertible for current account payments from March, 1994.
However, the limits of release of foreign exchange set forth in this circular are indicative; all
bonafide requests beyond these indicative limits and payment transfer requests for a current
international transaction not specifically included in this circular will be accommodated by
Bangladesh Bank upon establishing the bonafide of the expenses.

(2) All remittances from Bangladesh to a foreign country or local currency credited to non-
resident Taka accounts of foreign banks or convertible Taka account constitute outward
remittances of foreign exchange. ADs must exercise utmost caution to ensure that foreign
currencies remitted or released by them are used only for the purposes for which they are
released; they should also maintain proper records for submission of returns/reports to
Bangladesh Bank as also for the latter's inspection from time to time.

2. Reporting forms

(1) In all cases of purchase of foreign currency, an application must be made to an AD. For
payments other than against imports, the prescribed application form is Form TM (Appendix-1).
Form TM must be used by ADs even when remittance is approved by Bangladesh Bank in any
other manner, for instance by issuing a special permission/approval letter. On receipt of the
application from the client/customer, ADs may effect the sale of foreign exchange if they are
empowered to approve the application. If the transaction requires prior approval of Bangladesh
Bank, the application should be forwarded by ADs to Bangladesh Bank for consideration.

(2) Outward remittances (other than for import of goods) are to be reported to the 'Online TM
Monitoring System' of Bangladesh Bank. Here ADs are advised to mention „TM ID number
(unique number generated from the online system of Bangladesh Bank after posting)‟ at the
upper left corner of hard copy of Form TM. ADs are also required to furnish information
regarding payments of tax and value added tax in Online TM Form Monitoring System
(OTFMS) under Bangladesh Bank online reporting system within 25th day of the following
month to which they relate.

3. Application

Applications for Bangladesh Bank's prior approval for outward remittances, wherever required,
should be submitted to Bangladesh Bank only through ADs and not by their customers directly;
all such applications should be forwarded by ADs to Bangladesh Bank by their own messengers
or by post. While applying to Bangladesh Bank for releasing foreign exchange on behalf of

--- Page 8 ---
customers, ADs should submit necessary papers/documents duly attested by the authorized
official of ADs along with their recommendations/comments.

4. Dealing with approved applications

In respect of the special permissions/approvals from Bangladesh Bank, ADs should see that these
have been duly signed by authorized officers of Bangladesh Bank. In case the authorization is
signed by an official of Bangladesh Bank whose specimen signature is not available with them,
authentication of the authorization should be made from the nearest office of Bangladesh Bank. It
is important that once the permissions have been accorded by Bangladesh Bank, ADs carry out
the transactions only on behalf of the original applicants for whom the permissions have been
given.

5. Permission for recurring remittances

The amount released must not exceed the authorized limit. Also, the instructions, if any, given in
the approval with regard to the amounts to be released periodically e.g. monthly or quarterly
must be strictly adhered to.

6. Period of validity of Bangladesh Bank's approval

All authorizations for selling foreign exchange for outward remittances given by Bangladesh
Bank remain valid for a period not exceeding 45 days from the date of approval unless they are
expressly stated as valid for a specified longer period or unless they have been revalidated for a
further period. ADs should not effect any remittance against approval of Bangladesh Bank which
have lapsed.

7. Disposal of application forms

(1) ADs shall preserve the records of Form TM along with supporting papers at their own
custody for at least 05 years for record and inspection of Bangladesh Bank. However, in respect
of cases which are under investigation by Bangladesh Bank inspection team/other Government
agencies, the Form shall be disposed of only after obtaining clearance from the inspection
team/Government agency concerned.

(2) ADs shall report all types of their foreign exchange transactions carried out by them,
including those of offshore banking units (OBUs) to the different web portals of Bangladesh
Bank on regular basis as directed by the concerned departments.

8. Cancellation of outward remittances

(1) In the event of any remittance which has already been reported to Bangladesh Bank on the
prescribed return being subsequently cancelled either in full or in part, ADs must report the

--- Page 9 ---
cancellation of the outward remittance as an inward remittance in Form C (Appendix-2). The
same shall be reported to the 'Online Inward Remittance Monitoring System' as well.

(2) In reporting such transactions to the 'Online Inward Remittance Monitoring System, TM ID
Number (as mentioned in paragraph 2) of concerned outward remittance shall have to be
mentioned against the head 'Outward Reference' of the above mentioned system. Besides, TM ID
Number shall have to be mentioned at the bottom right side of the hard copy of the Form C
(where applicable). ADs shall preserve the documents in support of such cancellation.

--- Page 10 ---
Part-B
TRAVEL

9. Release of foreign exchange for travel abroad

(1) The amount of foreign exchange released by an AD to a traveler with the approval of the
Bangladesh Bank or under general authority given to ADs by Bangladesh Bank should be
recorded by them on the traveler's valid passport as well as ticket under their stamp and
signature at the time of release of such exchange. Release of foreign exchange in excess of
USD 200 or equivalent will require valid visa except in the cases mentioned in sub-paragraph
10 below. However, while issuing foreign exchange to the Diplomats/Privileged persons/UN
personnel, Govt. officials travelling on official duties, such endorsement in their passports need
not be made. ADs should verify to satisfy that the ticket covers a journey to be undertaken not
later than two weeks after the date on which exchange is issued. No exchange should be sold
against tickets, which do not specify the date of departure.

(2) ADs may release foreign exchange up to USD 12,000. Out of the prescribed entitlement,
ADs may release up to 5,000 in the form of USD notes and the remainder in other freely
convertible currencies at any one instance. For resident Bangladeshi nationals proceeding
abroad against one way ticket for valid job or migration or study abroad, ADs may release the
entire unused foreign exchange of the annual travel entitlement of the person concerned in the
calendar year. Irrespective of foreign exchange entitlement, the outgoing passenger is
permitted to take up to Bangladesh Taka 10,000 in cash at each time.

(3) Endorsement of foreign exchange on passports is applicable against release of foreign
exchange either in cash or in non-cash form like international cards, etc. or both out of eligible
entitlements of travels. The endorsement is equally applicable for release of foreign exchange
in cash irrespective of entitlements/sources to persons other than those holding foreign
passports. However, foreign exchange can be released without endorsement on passports in
non-cash form like international cards, etc. out of balances held in private foreign currency
(FC) accounts and resident foreign currency deposit (RFCD) accounts maintained under
general authorization by concerned accountholders.

(4) The above limits are indicative. Bangladesh Bank will authorize release of foreign
exchange for travel abroad beyond these indicative limits upon submission of documents
regarding the bonafide of the expenses. Application for such authorization should be sent to
Foreign Exchange Operation Department (FEOD)/other office of Bangladesh Bank.

(5) The annual quotas mentioned above are for adult passengers. For minors (below 12 years in
age) the applicable quota will be half the amount allowable to adults.

(6) While releasing foreign exchange for travel abroad, ADs should verify and satisfy that any
foreign exchange released for an earlier travel was utilized with the journey being actually
undertaken or was duly encashed unutilized.

--- Page 11 ---
(7) The travel entitlements mentioned above may be utilized also by way of international cards
issued in the names of the persons concerned as per relevant regulations.

(8) While releasing foreign exchange for travel purposes ADs should ensure that:
(a) the intending traveler is a client of AD bank or is sufficiently well known to AD bank for it
to be satisfied about the bonafide of the application;
(b) the intending traveler is in possession of a confirmed air ticket (where applicable) for
journey to be undertaken;
(c) the amount released is endorsed on the passport and air ticket (where applicable) of the
traveler with indelible ink, with the signature and name of AD branch embossed in the
passport and ticket (where applicable); the same has been reported to the 'Online Foreign
Exchange Transaction Monitoring System' of Bangladesh Bank.
(d) the amount of foreign exchange endorsed/issued (in the forms of cash, international card,
etc.) so far during the current calendar year against annual travel quota has been checked to
prevent issuance of foreign exchange beyond allowable quota.

(9) In each case of release of foreign exchange for travel abroad, photocopies of first six pages
of the passport/in case of machine readable passport, photocopies of first two pages, page
bearing visa on the passport (if available), the page recording endorsement of foreign exchange
and photocopies of the pages of ticket showing name of the passenger, route and date of
journey and endorsement of foreign exchange alongwith the relative Form TM should
preserved by ADs as per requirement. These transactions shall be reported in usual monthly
returns to Bangladesh Bank.

(10) Release of foreign exchange to the resident Bangladesh nationals travelling abroad
without visa
(a) In case of travelling some countries, visa is obtainable on port entry/arrival basis. In such
cases, ADs may release foreign exchange without visa to the resident Bangladesh nationals
proceeding to the countries/zones with provision of visa on port entry/arrival basis up to the
unused annual travel quota entitlement applicable for country concerned subject to complying
with other relevant instructions. Besides having validity of the passport of the intending
traveler for a period of minimum six months, the applicability of providing visa on port
entry/arrival basis for travelling the country concerned shall have to be ensured by ADs upon
receipt of information from the concerned passenger. However, utilization of foreign exchange
issued without visa as mentioned above shall have to be ensured by ADs prior to issuance of
foreign exchange for the subsequent foreign tour of the passenger concerned.
(b) In case of releasing foreign exchange for official visits abroad by the officials of
Government/Semi-Government and Autonomous bodies (paragraph 11) the below mentioned
facility of issuing foreign exchange without visa for traveling the countries/zones having
provision of visa on port entry/on arrival basis will also be applicable.

--- Page 12 ---
(c) ADs may endorse/set travel entitlements on relevant passports to concerned Bangladeshi
nationals in international cards for multiple years up to their validity, subject to compliance
with the following instructions:
(i) Yearly use shall not exceed the limit.
(ii) Unused quota shall not be brought forward to following years.
(iii) Bangladesh nationals proceeding abroad for employment/immigration or study purpose
will not be eligible to avail this facility. Multiple endorsement should be discontinued for such
individuals.
(iv) Supplementary cardholders may avail this facility against their own travel entitlement with
endorsement on own passports.

(11) The time limit for annual travel quota will be counted from January 01 to December 31. If
the travel involves subsequent year, travel entitlement will be counted for the particular year to
which the transaction date relates. In that case, post facto endorsement will be required for the
subsequent year unless multiple years‟ endorsement facility has been used; particularly under
international cards. Reporting to Bangladesh Bank for such cases will be based on transactions
date.

(12) In case of exceeding the quota limit endorsed through international cards, without availing
the facility as noted above, while on travel abroad, for unavoidable but bonafide grounds
acceptable to ADs, the excess amounts may be adjusted in the following ways:
(a) By debit to RFCD accounts of relevant travelers;
(b) Excess amount not exceeding USD 500 or equivalent may be adjusted against travel quota
of the following year without prior approval from Bangladesh Bank if option (a) is not possible
to be executed.
(c) ADs shall have adequate arrangements including monitoring mechanism to implement the
above decisions meticulously.

10. Release of foreign exchange for travel on health ground

(1) All applications for foreign exchange for travel abroad on health grounds should be
submitted in form as at Appendix-3, in duplicate. Up to USD 15,000 or equivalent may be
released by ADs on the basis of the recommendation of the Medical Board set up by the Health
Directorate or on the basis of the need established through recommendation of appropriate
medical specialists and the cost estimate of the foreign medical institution. Request for release
of foreign exchange exceeding USD 15,000 for treatment abroad should be forwarded by ADs
with supporting documents to Bangladesh Bank (FEOD/other office) which will authorize
release upon verification of the bonafide of the expenses.

(2) The limit of USD 15,000 or equivalent shall stand relaxed on account of treatment abroad
for persons injured in the Students-People‟s uprising - July 2024 Revolution. In this context,
ADs may release foreign exchange based on estimation. In addition to banking channel,
international card channel may be used for the transactions.

--- Page 13 ---
(3) In case of release of foreign exchange through international cards (prepaid/debit/credit) for
travel abroad on health ground. ADs shall report the transactions in the field named “Medical
Quota” under ENTITLEMENT menu in online international card monitoring system.

11. Official or semi-official visits by employees of government/autonomous semi-
autonomous bodies

For
official
or
semi-official
visits
abroad
by
the
officials
of
Government/Autonomous/Semi-autonomous institutions etc., ADs may release foreign
exchange as per entitlements fixed by the Ministry of Finance/respective competent authority
from time to time. In such cases, the applicant for foreign exchange shall be required to submit
the Competent Authority's Order/Notification/Circular authorizing the travel abroad.

(2) Release of foreign exchange on account of 'overseas allowance' in favor of the cockpit and
cabin crews of Biman Bangladesh Airlines Ltd. ADs may release foreign exchange on account
of overseas allowances of the cockpit and cabin crews allowed by Biman Bangladesh Airlines
Ltd. Before releasing foreign exchange, ADs shall observe the following instructions:
(a) An approval letter from Biman Bangladesh Airlines Ltd. in favor of the crews specifying
the amount to be released should be obtained.
(b) The amount released should be endorsed properly on the passport of the crews. Licensed
Money Changers may also release foreign exchange for above purpose observing the
instructions as laid down above.

12. Release of foreign exchange for attending seminar, conference, workshop, training
etc. abroad

ADs may release foreign exchange to private sector participants for attending seminar,
conference, workshop, training, etc. abroad at the scale of USD 400 per diem irrespective of
countries or regions, with additional one day diem facility. Foreign exchange may be released
only for the actual period of the program to be held on the basis of invitation letters received in
the names of the applicants or their employer institutions. Photocopy of the invitation letter and
all other related documents should be kept in record by ADs for post facto scrutiny by the
inspection officials of Bangladesh Bank. Release of foreign exchange beyond the above
mentioned indicative limits will be allowed by Bangladesh Bank upon submission of requests
supported by documented proof of the expenses. Application for such release should be sent to
Bangladesh Bank (FEOD or other offices).

13. Release of foreign exchange by debiting convertible Taka account for travel abroad

Foreign exchange may be released to private individuals as well as to officials of Govt.,
Autonomous and Semi-autonomous bodies for undertaking educational tours, attending
seminars, workshops etc. abroad by debit to convertible Taka accounts of foreign NGOs and
International Bodies at their request. In the cases of officials of Government/ Autonomous/
Semi-autonomous bodies, the application for release of foreign exchange should be

--- Page 14 ---
accompanied by the permission letter of the competent authority authorizing their proposed
travel abroad.

14. Issue of foreign exchange currency notes

(1) Issue of foreign currency notes to foreign nationals

ADs may issue foreign currency notes up to USD 5,000 per person against surrender of
equivalent amounts in other foreign currencies. The foreign currency notes should, however, be
delivered only on production of a ticket for a destination outside Bangladesh and the amount
issued should be endorsed on the relative passports. In case of travel by car, ADs may accept
export-cum-import permits in lieu of tickets.

(2) Issue of foreign currency notes to FC account holders

Foreign currency account holders may draw foreign currency notes from balances of their
respective accounts without any limit up to 5000 in USD notes, against endorsement on
passport and ticket for a destination outside Bangladesh.

15. Business travel quota entitlements for exporters, manufacturers for domestic markets
and importers.

(1) Business travel quota entitlements for exporters, manufacturers for domestic markets and
importers will be as under:
(a) Exporters, importers and producers for the local market will be entitled to foreign exchange
quota for travel abroad @ USD 400 per diem, subject to limits of USD 4,000 per trip and USD
10,000 over a calendar year.
(b) Senior level (top two tires) expatriate foreign nationals employed in business organizations
in Bangladesh with valid visa and work permit will be entitled to the above mentioned business
travel quota as Bangladesh nationals.
(c) The above entitlement may be used through international cards (prepaid/credit) held by
authorized officials of the enterprise concerned (paragraph 92(9) of this circular).

(2) The above facility shall also be applicable for local agents operating in Bangladesh on
behalf of foreign principals without limiting to licensed indenting agents and buying agents.
Before releasing foreign exchange on account of business travel, ADs shall satisfy themselves
regarding bonafide of agents through valid agency agreements and other relevant documents.

(3) Genuine requirements beyond the entitlements enumerated above will be accommodated by
Bangladesh Bank upon submission of application supported by documents establishing
bonafide of the additional requirements. Application for such release should be sent to
Bangladesh Bank (FEOD or other office, Bangladesh Bank).

--- Page 15 ---
16. Disposal of unspent foreign exchange by returning residents

Attention of all persons granted foreign exchange for travel should be drawn to sub-section (3)
of Section 4 of the FER Act, 1947. No person acquiring foreign exchange for travel may use it
for purposes other than living or travelling expenses in the country for which exchange is
issued and in case of special allotment, for purposes other than those for which exchange is
sanctioned. On return, unspent amounts brought back with declaration in FMJ Form for
amounts more than USD 10,000 may freely be encashed to Taka or may be retained in RFCD
accounts, up to USD 10,000 may be retained in hand.

17. Reconversion of unspent Taka into foreign exchange by foreign tourists

(1) ADs may allow reconversion into foreign exchange of the unspent Taka funds of foreign
tourists (i.e. foreign nationals on temporary visit to Bangladesh except those on employment in
Bangladesh) on production of the certificate evidencing the encashment of foreign currency
brought in by the tourist. Reconversion shall be allowed by the same AD with which the
foreign currency was encashed earlier, on the strength of the original encashment certificates
which will be retained by ADs while allowing reconversion. The FMJ Form containing the
declaration of the foreign exchange brought in at the time of arrival should be asked for and
retained by AD where reconversion exceeds USD 10,000. Likewise, licensed money changer
whether it encashed earlier or not may reconvert the unspent Bangladesh Taka belong to the
foreign tourist up to USD 500 or equivalent provided that the tourist submits system generated
encashment certificate issued by any licensed money changer. While providing reconversion,
money changer shall stamp on the original encashment certificate to the effect that
reconversion has been executed and preserve a copy thereof.

(2) Besides, to facilitate returning foreign tourists/non-resident Bangladeshi nationals, general
permission has been accorded to reconvert their unspent Bangladesh Taka up to USD 100 or
its equivalent at the bank booths situated at the departure lounges of international airports in
Bangladesh upon presentation of encashment certificate. While providing such reconversion
facility, the bank both will have to preserve the original encashment certificate/true copy of the
encashment certificate attested by AD/money changer itself issued against conversion of
foreign currency into local currency earlier and copy of the boarding card of the passenger
wherein passport number, date of issue of passport, nationality and amount of reconverted
foreign currency are to be recorded.

18. Release of foreign exchange for Hajj

The Government of Bangladesh announces each year the scale at which foreign exchange may
be issued to intending pilgrims for performing Hajj. Release of foreign exchange should be
made as per instructions to be issued for this purpose by Bangladesh Bank each year.

--- Page 16 ---
10

19. Release of foreign exchange for Umrah Hajj

(1) ADs may effect outward remittances, on behalf of Umrah Hajj agents licensed by the
Ministry of Religious Affairs, to official Umrah Hajj service agents/providers at Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia (KSA) against their Umrah Hajj packages sold to intending pilgrims for
performing Umrah Hajj, subject to observance of the following instructions:
(a) ADs shall obtain documents from the licensed agents in support of the sales of Umrah Hajj
packages to intending pilgrims, compliant with Umrah Hajj policy in force of the Government.
(b) ADs shall endorse foreign exchange out of annual travel entitlement on passports of
pilgrims up to the expenses to be incurred in KSA and retain the same in foreign exchange
margin accounts of licensed agents. Service charges including air ticket fare for journey from
Bangladesh, if included in the packages; payable to licensed agents shall be settled in Taka.
(c) Intending pilgrims may arrange foreign exchange out of annual travel entitlement and/or
balances held in RFCD accounts. Pilgrims may also arrange transfer of foreign currency from
their designated ADs favoring licensed agents after endorsement on passports. The transferred
fund shall be retained in margin accounts of licensed agents maintained by their ADs as per (b)
above.
(d) Foreign exchange so realized against sales of Umrah Hajj packages shall be remittable to
KSA on deduction and payment of applicable taxes thereon.

(2) ADs may also release foreign currency out of unused travel entitlement in cash to meet the
needs of intending pilgrims during their stay in KSA.

(3) ADs shall observe customers‟ due diligence/KYC including AML/CFT standards and
reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 17 ---
11

Part-C
PRIVATE REMITTANCES

20. Transfer of assets of foreign nationals retiring from Bangladesh

Foreign nationals leaving Bangladesh permanently after expiry of period of service in terms of
relevant employment contracts, may transfer abroad their genuine savings out of
salaries/benefits clearly stated in the employment contracts duly approved by the
BIDA/BEPZA/BEZA/BHTPA or other competent government authorities. They shall also be
eligible to transfer abroad the retirement benefits such as provident fund, pension, gratuity due
as per employment contracts approved by the BIDA/BEPZA/BEZA/BHTPA, etc.

21. Retirement benefits, etc

ADs may, without prior approval of Bangladesh Bank, effect remittance of retirement benefits
and savings including sale proceeds of investments in government securities made in
accordance with paragraph 24 below (but not including sale proceeds of real assets such as
household articles, real estates and other real assets, requests if any for remittance of such sale
proceeds should be forwarded to Bangladesh Bank); as per instructions in the following
paragraphs.

22. Application and supporting documentation

(1) Application as per proforma at Appendix-4 duly filled in by the applicant and his employer
should be accompanied by:
(a) Form TM duly filled in and signed by the applicant;
(b) A certificate from the employer showing:
(i) Net salary and allowances for each year;
(ii) Provident fund and leave salary paid on retirement;
(iii) Bonus and other gratuitous payments for each year;
(iv) Whether the cost of passage for self and family is being paid by the employer.

(c) A certified true copy of the employment contract approved by BIDA or competent authority
of the Govt. of Bangladesh should be produced in support of the above.
(d) Where any of the above payments are not covered by the original service contract, a
certified copy of the resolution of the board of directors of the employer company allowing the
payment and approval thereof from the Govt. Department which originally approved the
employment of the foreign national should be submitted.
(e) In case of persons employed in the private sector, certified true copies of the relative
permission letters for employment issued by the appropriate Govt. Department should be
attached,
(f) Bank's encashment certificate in support of receipt of funds, if any, from abroad.

--- Page 18 ---
12

(g) AD's certificate in regard to the applicant's investment in Govt. securities made for availing
of the income tax relief showing also the amount realized from the sale proceeds and income
accrued on the investments,
(h) Bank's certificate showing:
(i) Total amount of remittances made on account of family maintenance.
(ii) Total amount of remittances made on account of leave salary.

(i) In case where the period of stay exceeds 10 years, the bank's certificate should cover the
period of last 10 years.
(j) Statements of transactions in bank account for the last one year prior to the date of the
application with explanation of sources of credit entries of Tk. 500 or more other than those
relating to receipt of salaries and allowances.
(k) Application for transfer of actuarial reserve and relative insurance record in respect of
insurance policy, if any, is required to be submitted through the insurance company concerned.
(l) The statements/certificates mentioned in the sub-paragraphs (f), (g), (h), (j) and (k) above
are to be prepared by ADs themselves on the basis of their own records.
(m) Clearance certificate in respect of income tax and other taxes payable.
(n) For remittance of pension/provident fund/gratuity on account of an employee retiring from
a foreign-owned/foreign controlled organization, a certificate signed jointly by the employer
organization and its nominated AD that the relevant pension fund/retirement fund out of which
the retirement benefits are payable are maintained in Bangladesh and that no remittance
towards contribution to any retirement fund maintained abroad has been made in respect of the
applicant employee.

(2) Examination and processing of applications
(a) Before effecting remittance of retirement benefits, ADs should verify with reference to the
terms of employment contract approved by the competent government department (currently
BIDA/BEPZA/BEZA/HTPA, etc.) that the benefits applied for remittance are indeed due as
per terms of the employment contract. In case of applicants retiring from foreign
owned/foreign controlled companies, ADs shall satisfy themselves, with reference to the
certificate mentioned at paragraph 22(1)(n) that the relative pension/retirement funds are
maintained locally.
(b) Before effecting remittance of funds representing savings, ADs shall carefully examine the
applications and supporting documents to satisfy themselves that the amount applied for
remittance are the genuine savings out of the applicant's own legitimate earnings in
Bangladesh. For this purpose, they will look into the information on earnings of the applicant
such as approved salary, allowance, bonus etc., debits for the applicant's local expenses out of
such earnings, outward remittances already made or to be made; and inward remittances
received from abroad, if any.
(c) Details of credits to bank account of the applicant during the preceding one year at least
should be scrutinized to ascertain that only the items of the applicant's own legitimate earnings
have been included in arriving at the amount of savings applied for remittance.

--- Page 19 ---
13

(d) If on the basis of the above examination there emerges sufficient grounds to believe that the
amount applied for remittance is in excess of the applicant's possible genuine savings, ADs
shall effect remittance only to the extent of its own estimate of the applicant's genuine savings
and thereafter refer the case to FEOD, Bangladesh Bank for further consideration regarding the
excess amount, with such additional explanation /representation as the applicant may wish to
furnish.
(e) Pension payments: In cases where pension is payable at regular intervals after the initial
lumpsum payment of retirement benefits, ADs shall effect remittances of regular pension
payments provided that life certificate in respect of the pensioner issued by the paying banker
abroad is produced and ADs are satisfied on the basis of documentary evidence that the relative
pension fund is maintained locally.

23. Reporting

Remittances effected in accordance with the above instructions will be reported by ADs to the
concerned area office of Bangladesh Bank in the usual monthly returns. ADs shall maintain
full records of cases of remittance of retirement benefits and savings of foreign nationals
disposed of by them, for eventual examination by the inspecting officials of Bangladesh Bank.

24. Investments by foreign nationals in certificates/securities, etc.

(1) All requests for investment by foreign nationals in Bangladesh Govt. securities such as
defense savings certificate etc., for the purpose of claiming income tax relief against
investment allowance should be submitted through the applicant's bank to Bangladesh Bank for
prior approval. While forwarding the application to Bangladesh Bank, ADs will furnish a
certificate to the following effect on the application form:
(a) The investment is proposed to be made out of the applicant's genuine savings in
Bangladesh.
(b) The applicant does not have local borrowings and overdrafts.
(c) The proposed investment is for qualifying for tax relief against the investment allowance
allowed by income tax authorities.

(2) If, however, the applicant has local borrowings and overdrafts, full details thereof should be
furnished viz.,
(a) The date on which the loan /overdraft was obtained;
(b) The purpose for which the loan /overdraft was obtained; and
(c) The amount of loan/overdraft outstanding as on the date of application for investment in
Govt. securities.

25. Remittance of sales proceeds of real assets

Application for remittance of sale proceeds of real assets such as household articles and real
estates, should be forwarded to Bangladesh Bank with the following documents /certificates:

--- Page 20 ---
14

(1) Statement of sale proceeds realized in respect of locally purchased articles of value Tk 500
(five hundred) or more mentioning:
(a) Description;
(b) Purchase price;
(c) Date of purchase;
(d) Date of sale and
(e) Sale proceeds realized.

(2) Relative sale receipts or their certified true copies should be produced.

(3) A statement of sale proceeds realized in respect of articles imported/brought from abroad of
value Tk 500 or more mentioning (a) description (b) landed cost in Bangladesh (c) date of
import (d) date of sale (e) sale proceeds realized. Relative import documents and relative sale
receipts or their certified true copies should be produced.

26. Legacies and other distribution of assets from the estates of deceased persons

(1) Application for remittance of legacies and other distributions from estates of deceased
persons due to beneficiaries resident outside Bangladesh should be forwarded to Bangladesh
Bank. Such applications should contain the following information and supporting documents:
(a) Name, nationality and place of residence of the deceased at the time of his death. If the
deceased person was resident of Bangladesh the period of such residence should be stated.
(b) A copy of the relative clauses in the Will after probate has been granted or if the deceased
died intestate, in the Letters of Administration; in both cases authenticated by a Notary Public,
any Court, Judge or Magistrate in Bangladesh or in the country of residence of the deceased if
he died abroad.

(2) When making applications a full statement of the assets of the deceased in Bangladesh
should be given including a statement of bank account and all other assets. The balance in the
bank accounts representing income earned during the year should be stated separately in cases
where the deceased was a person resident outside Bangladesh. The amounts which are not
allowed to be remitted to the beneficiaries will be permitted by Bangladesh Bank to be credited
to a blocked account in the name of the executor or administrator with a bank in Bangladesh. If
any security, shares and real estate which have been specifically bequeathed to persons resident
outside Bangladesh are to be transferred to such beneficiaries, the application should also
contain full particulars of such securities, shares and real estate.

27. Family remittance facility

(1) ADs may remit up to 80% of earned net income after tax at any time all over the year
subject to availability of fund in the bank accounts concerned of foreign nationals working in
Bangladesh as per “Form of Application for Private Remittance by Foreign National to
Countries Abroad” prescribed in Appendix-5.

--- Page 21 ---
15

(2) The remaining 20% of foreign nationals‟ net income will be remittable at the end of the
financial year upon completion of income tax assessment, supported by certificate issued by
tax authority concerned.

(3) ADs are also allowed to remit foreign nationals‟ net income from the employers‟ FC
account opened and maintained for this purpose to abroad where the family members of the
foreign employees reside.

(4) Before executing the remittances ADs will ensure that the remittable amount does not
exceed the balance held in related bank account.

(5) The employer of the foreign nationals shall prepare the “Certificate Required under
paragraph 27(1)” of Appendix-5 considering all the monetary and non-monetary benefits as
specified in the work permit granted by the competent authorities in compliance with the
relevant provisions of Income Tax regulations in force. ADs shall observe due diligence with
regards to customers‟ KYC and AML/CFT standards, reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank
and so on.

(6) Bonus or commission receivable by foreign nationals cannot be added for calculating
monthly entitlement in anticipation of the grant of bonus or commission, the inclusion will be
made only after the net amount of bonus or commission has been actually paid by the
employers and will be spread over the subsequent twelve months. However, subject to
deduction of applicable taxes and payment thereof at one-go without spreading over the
subsequent 12 months. Foreign nationals, however, can exercise prevailing regulations at their
options.

(7) Salary and benefits in foreign currency accounts

Up to 80 percent of net monthly income in equivalent foreign currency may be credited to FC
accounts of the expatriate employees maintained and operated under general authorization
from permissible FC/ERQ accounts or Taka accounts of their employers. In respect of
transactions, ADs shall observe the following instructions:

(a) While crediting FC accounts, the transactions shall be treated as outward remittances and
accordingly Form TM procedures need to be followed.
(b) ADs may, out of the balances held in the accounts, allow debit/prepaid cards to the FC
account holders for permissible transactions including travel related expenses.
(c) Encashment of balances held in FC accounts shall be treated as inward remittances for
bonafide local disbursements, including purchase of air ticket locally.

(8) Remittance of leave salaries of foreign nationals

Net salary of the foreign nationals payable for the period of leave admissible to them as per
their service contract duly approved by the Govt. will be remittable. In such cases a declaration

--- Page 22 ---
16

from the employer to be obtained to the effect that leave for which remittance is claimed has
been earned exclusively on service tendered in Bangladesh. Such remittance should be effected
on approach by the employer. The employer should also be advised that the remittance for the
remaining period will not be admissible should the employee return to Bangladesh earlier than
the period for which it was intended for. Family remittance facility will not be admissible for
the period for which leave salary will be availed of.

(9) Foreign exchange issuance against family remittance facility/leave salary for travel abroad

Foreign exchange may be released for short travels abroad during approved employment
period of the foreign national and his/her spouse and other family members; amounts so
released should be adjusted from the monthly remittance entitlement, or from the leave salary
remittable as per sub-paragraph (8) above. Such release of foreign exchange would be against
tickets evidencing confirmed date of travel within two weeks from the date of release of
foreign exchange.

(10) Remittances effected in accordance with the above instructions will be reported to
Bangladesh Bank in the usual monthly returns of ADs. ADs shall maintain full records of such
remittances, for eventual examination by inspection officials of Bangladesh Bank as also for
reference while processing applications for remittance of savings on retirement from
Bangladesh

28. Membership fees, fees for application, registration, admission, examination, etc.

(1) ADs may release foreign exchange towards remittance of membership fees of foreign
professional and scientific institutions, both for individuals and corporate in Bangladesh. They
are also allowed to remit fees for application, registration, admission and examination
(TOEFL, SAT etc.) in connection with admission into foreign educational institutions on the
basis of written application or demand notice/letter from the concerned foreign institution
showing the amount to be remitted. The remittance to be effected should be payable direct to
the institution concerned and the transaction should be reported to the Bangladesh Bank in the
usual monthly return.

(2) ADs may allow authorized examination centers/operators to collect admission/registration
and examination-related expenses in Taka on account of TOEFL, SAT, etc., and secondary and
higher secondary equivalent studies under recognized foreign academic bodies/authorities for
outward remittances. In this context, ADs are required to observe the following instructions:
(a) Examination centers/operators-customers are duly authorized by relevant bodies/authorities
abroad.
(b) ADs shall conduct due diligence with regards to customers‟ KYC including permission, if
required, by the competent authorities to conduct examinations, valid agreements signed with
relevant bodies/authorities abroad, and other issues appropriate for the activities.
(c) ADs shall ensure that payment clauses in arrangements with counterparts abroad do not
exceed 90-day credit facilities.

--- Page 23 ---
17

(d) Income on account of fees, service charges, etc. is to be collected through bank accounts.

(3) Remittances: ADs shall effect remittances provided that:
(a) instructions mentioned in paragraph (2) above are duly complied with;
(b) submitted invoices are supported by statements containing details of examinees‟ names,
names of examination, collection amount, payable amount in foreign currency and in Taka,
applicable taxes such as source tax, VAT, etc., payable net of tax and other charges in foreign
currency and in Taka, earnings over expenses, and other relevant information;
(c) balances held in bank accounts are sufficient to cover the remittances applied for;
(d) remittance requests shall contain an undertaking from remitters to the effect that statements
reflect actual position and no payment therein has been made earlier and will not be effected in
future. In case of wrong calculation, they will arrange repatriation of the same immediately on
detection and they will be held responsible for misinformation; and
(e) remitters shall declare that the remittance requests do not contain any non-resident/foreign
examinees.

(4) Remittances under the authority of this circular may be made through only an AD branch
designated by remitters, with intimation to Bangladesh Bank, head office/concerned area
office.

(5) ADs shall observe routine reports to Bangladesh Bank including reports on taxes as per
paragraph 2 of this circular. As usual, ADs shall preserve records in details of the transactions,
with electronic option, for verification by the inspection team of Bangladesh Bank.

(6) Besides traditional mode of payment, international cards may be used for online payment
through internet of fees mentioned above. Individuals not holding international cards in their
names may also make such online payment through internet using 'Virtual Card' for the
required amount by an international cards issuing bank for use through its designated bank
branch. Online international card transactions including virtual card transactions shall have to
be reported to Bangladesh Bank as per usual reporting norms.

29. Release of foreign exchange for study abroad

(1) Prior approval of Bangladesh Bank is required to release foreign exchange for study of
Bangladeshi students abroad at school level. However, ADs are allowed to release foreign
exchange for admission and study by Bangladesh nationals in regular courses such as
undergraduate, post graduate, language course pre-requisite to bachelor degree & professional
diploma/certificate courses in recognized institutions abroad. Remittance for language course
regardless of pre-requisite to bachelor degree is permissible. In all cases, ADs shall conduct
verification of bonafide according to the following drill:
(a) Application and required papers
(i) Application (Appendix-6) duly filled in;
(ii) Original and photocopy of admission letter issued by the educational institution in favor of
the student (such as the I-20 in the case of US institutions);

--- Page 24 ---
18

(iii) Original and photocopy of estimate relating to annual tuition fee, board and lodging,
insurance, incidental expenses etc. issued by the concerned educational institution (I-20 in case
of US institutions);
(iv) Attested copies of educational certificates of the applicant; and
(v) Valid Passport.

(b) Examination and processing by ADs
(i) After scrutinizing the application and the supporting documents submitted, ADs shall issue
foreign exchange as per estimate furnished by the educational institution.
(ii) In each case of sale of foreign exchange, the front page of the original letter of
estimate/acceptance letter issued by the concerned educational institute should bear clearly the
round stamp of the foreign exchange issuing bank branch and also the signature of the officer
of the said branch.
(iii) After verifying the original copies of papers referred to in paragraph (a) above, the foreign
exchange issuing ADs would attest the photocopy thereof and preserve the same. Thereafter,
the original copies would be returned to the applicant.
(iv) Foreign exchange payable to the educational institution should be released in favor of the
institution concerned. If payment on account of board and lodging/incidental expenses etc. are
not required compulsorily to be in favor of the educational institution, foreign exchange on
these counts may be issued in favor of the student in the form of international card. Educational
institutions sometimes require applicants to send advance amounts for processing of
applications, retention of seats etc. If the papers of the foreign educational institution clearly
state such requirement, advance remittance may be effected. ADs may also release foreign
exchange for study of Bangladeshi students in permissible courses abroad in favor of the
designated intermediary payment processing entity provided it is clearly mentioned in ADs
mission documents (I-20, Admission Acceptance Letter etc.) of the concerned main
educational institution that fees, charges etc. are to be remitted through their designated entity.
(v) ADs may also release foreign exchange on account of Health Coverage/ Health Insurance/
Medical Insurance fee provided that such fees are mandatory for Visa/Admission in
permissible courses supported by documentary evidence (I-20, Admission Acceptance Letter,
Offer Letter etc.) from the concerned educational institution.
(vi) The facility of purchase of foreign exchange/remittance will not be admissible for more
than one academic year at a time.
(vii) For each release of foreign exchange subsequent to the first release, the current progress
report and current estimate of the educational institution should be taken into consideration.
ADs shall maintain separate file for each student with all relevant papers in readiness for
perusal by inspecting officials of Bangladesh Bank.
(viii) All purchases of foreign exchange throughout the entire duration of a course of study
pursued abroad should be from one AD bank branch. For any intended change in this respect,
the relevant file shall be transferred direct to the concerned new AD branch on written request
by the student. Under no circumstance should the file be handed over to the student.

(2) Deposit in foreign currency to blocked accounts abroad for visa/admission processing
against study purpose

--- Page 25 ---
19


If students intending to study abroad are required to deposit foreign currency to be blocked in
designated bank accounts or student accounts abroad opened in accordance with the guidance
of foreign educational institutes/embassies/high commissions, they are allowed to open such
blocked accounts abroad to which necessary funds as set by foreign institutes/competent
authority in foreign currency may be released after observing the following instructions:
(a) ADs shall get ensured with documentary evidence that the deposits will be refundable in
case of non-availability of visa;
(b) In case of non-availability of visa, ADs shall ask students/guardians to arrange repatriation
of remittance for which ADs shall obtain due undertaking from them;
(c) ADs shall follow up students to the effect that they will proceed abroad within one year of
remittance;
(d) The deposits remitted as blocked fund for future use shall be adjusted as relevant expenses
including foreign bank charges for the study with proper documentation therein.

(3) Release of foreign exchange for studying abroad in special cases
ADs are allowed to release foreign exchange for admission and study by Bangladeshi nationals
in regular courses such as undergraduate, post graduate & professional diploma/certificate
courses in institutions abroad as per instructions mentioned above. Sometimes students get
themselves admitted into the foreign institutions without taking away foreign currency from
Bangladesh source. Besides, ADs may need to release foreign exchange in cases of changing
institution, changing subject and opening of student file for new higher course by the students.
In these cases, ADs may allow the remittances on being satisfied after scrutiny of following
documents and in compliance with above mentioned paragraph:
(a) Release of foreign exchange for the student studying abroad
(i) Complete and satisfactory explanation regarding request for releasing foreign exchange for
study abroad after leaving the country;
(ii) Documentary evidence in support of admission executed earlier;
(iii) Academic results of previous semesters;
(iv) Sources and amount of the expenses incurred as of date.

(b) Change of educational institution
(i) Reasonable explanation by the applicant for the change;
(ii) Certificate evidencing that the new institute has agreed to accept the credits earned in the
present institution.

(c) Change of subject
(i) Reasonable explanation by the applicant for the change.

(d) Opening of student file for new higher course after completing one course
(i) In compliance with the prevailing instructions on release of foreign exchange for study
abroad.

--- Page 26 ---
20

30. Remittance on account of correspondence courses

(1) In order to facilitate development of professional skills, ADs may effect remittances on
account of correspondence courses/distant certification courses to be paid by students to
foreign professional/educational institutions for appearing in professional examinations. In this
context, ADs shall examine the following documents:
(a) Form TM signed by applicants supported by a declaration as per Appendix-7.
(b) Demand note/invoice/examination fee notice, etc.

(2) The remittances are to be effected in the name of the foreign institutions abroad, subject to
deduction of applicable taxes.

(3) The facility shall be admissible for one correspondence course at a time.

(4) For each release of foreign exchange subsequent to the first release, the current progress
report needs be taken into consideration.

(5) ADs may execute the remittances through card channels in terms of paragraph 96.

(6) All purchases of foreign exchange throughout the entire duration of a correspondence
course should be from one AD bank branch. ADs shall maintain separate file for each student
with all relevant papers in readiness for perusal by inspection team of Bangladesh Bank.

31. Remittance of Consular fees

(1) Consular fees collected by foreign embassies in Bangladesh Taka and deposited in a Taka
Account maintained with an AD solely for depositing the consular fee collections may be
remitted abroad without prior Bangladesh Bank approval. Besides, collection of visa
processing fees through nominated resident agents of foreign embassies may be remitted
abroad to bank account designated by embassies or their home offices. In this context ADs
shall observe the following instructions:
(a) Collection of visa fee shall be as per the rate determined by the concerned embassies;
(b) ADs shall obtain invoice from embassies/home offices supported by visa applicant-wise
statement of collection;
(c) ADs shall ensure deduction of applicable taxes.

(2) International cards (debit/prepaid) may be used for online payments of visa processing fees.
In this context, ADs may issue international cards in the name of official designated by
nominated resident agents of foreign embassies.

32. Remittance of visa fee abroad

(1) Visa fee is remittable abroad by individuals also if embassies of those countries are not
located in Bangladesh on the basis of the demand of the foreign embassies concerned. Such fee

--- Page 27 ---
21

is also remittable to the visa agents abroad nominated by the concerned countries as per
invoice/requirement of the concerned embassies after deduction of applicable taxes.

(2) Online payment of visa processing fees through international card as per requirement of
concerned Embassies/High commissions may be effected also. International card issuing banks
may also issue Virtual Cards for individuals not holding international cards to facilitate the
online payment of visa processing fees.

(3) ADs shall report such remittance in the online monitoring system as well as usual monthly
returns to the concerned office of Bangladesh Bank.

33. Remittance of immigration visa processing fees, evaluation fees, right of landing fee

(1) Immigration visa processing fees and evaluation fees for evaluation of educational
certificates, demanded by foreign Immigration Authorities from resident Bangladesh nationals
applying for immigration visa, may be remitted by ADs as per demand notes of the Foreign
Immigration Authorities, on approach by the applicants. Besides, ADs may also allow
remittance on account of 'right of landing fee/permanent residence fee' required for resident
Bangladesh nationals finally proceeding abroad for migration. Such fees may be remitted in
favour of immigration authority abroad upon establishment of bonafide of the demand. While
processing the case of remittance on account of right of landing fee/permanent residence fee,
ADs are advised to obtain the following papers/documents from the applicant:
(a) application of the candidate;
(b) copy of passport;
(c) fee schedule;
(d) letter from authority (demand note/offer letter);
(e) Nikah-nama (for spouse who has been selected);
(f) copy of medical report;
(g) money receipt for medical check-up.

(2) Such remittances shall be reported to the area offices of Bangladesh Bank in the usual
monthly returns.

(3) Fees relating to immigration may also be remittable to the agents nominated by the
concerned authorities complying the relevant instruction in this regard.

34. Remittance for professional/skilled category employment abroad and immigration

(1) ADs may remit funds in bank accounts maintained under general authorization by
Bangladeshi nationals in the countries in which they intend to proceed before obtaining visas.
In this context, ADs need to observe following instructions:

(a) ADs shall obtain documentary evidences in supports of the requirement to maintain bank
accounts aboard and deposits therein;

--- Page 28 ---
22

(b) The fund to be remittable shall not exceed the limit as required by the documents issued by
respective authorities;
(c) ADs shall ensure that bank accounts will not be operative before proceeding abroad by
applicants;
(d) In case of non-receipt of visas, ADs shall ensure repatriation of the fund and shall obtain an
undertaking from applicants in this regard;
(e) ADs shall satisfy that the facilities will not be available for immigration under investment
categories.

(2) ADs shall observe reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank, and regulations on taxes.

35. Remittance for family maintenance abroad by residents

Applications for remittance of moderate amounts of foreign exchange for maintenance of
family members (dependent parents, spouses and children) living abroad may be forwarded by
ADs to Bangladesh Bank for consideration and prior approval. Each application should be
supported by a certificate issued by the relevant Bangladesh Embassy regarding residency of
the beneficiaries, extent of income abroad alongwith the Embassy's recommendation as to
moderate requirement for family maintenance purpose. The certificate should also indicate the
purpose for which the family member(s) went abroad, reasons for continued residence abroad
and the probable period of stay abroad.

36. Registration/participation fee for attending training, seminar, workshop abroad

(1) ADs may release foreign exchange on account of registration/participation fee of the
officials of Govt., Autonomous/Semi-autonomous institution, employees of banks and finance
companies operating in Bangladesh, faculty members of nationally recognized banking training
institutions, employees/officials of company/firm/institution/NGO registered and operating in
Bangladesh under the existing laws of the country subject to observance of following terms
and conditions:
(a) the invitation letter is received in the name of applicant from the organizing institution;
(b) the tour must be approved by the employer;
(c) the fee as indicated in invoice/demand note is reasonable;
(d) the program of training/seminar/workshop is appropriate for the intending employee/
official based on his/her job specification;
(e) the program of training/seminar/workshop is financed out of budgetary allocation of the
institution;
(f) request for remittance of more than one time for attending training/seminar/workshop in a
year favoring a single person is to be justified;
(g) request letter to remit the fee from the employer is received;
(h) registration certificate of the concerned institution is received;
(i) remittance should be made only favoring organizing institutions.

--- Page 29 ---
23

(2) For employees of banks and finance companies, ADs need to observe relevant instructions
regarding their foreign tours.

(3) ADs shall report the transactions to FEOD or other office of Bangladesh Bank in monthly
returns/statements. ADs are also advised to collect and retain copies of completion certificate,
travel documents from the applicants upon return to Bangladesh for eventual inspection by
Bangladesh Bank.

37. Remittance towards publication related fees of articles in international journals

ADs may release foreign exchange towards remittance of fees for publication of articles in
reputed international journals written by resident Bangladeshi nationals. While effecting
remittance, ADs shall satisfy themselves about the genuineness of the invoices from the
publishing companies/publishers abroad and deduction of applicable taxes.

38. Remittance of IT expenses through Virtual Cards (debit, credit or prepaid)

International
card
issuing
banks
may
issue
'Virtual
Card'
to
individual
developers/freelancers of mobile Apps and Games having acknowledgements/training/boot-
camps/hackathons/course participation certificates on mobile application development
arranged by government authority, BASIS, or its member organization and any other
recognized training/academic institutes for online payment of fees for -
(a) Registration/license fees to reputed online or mobile application marketplace like Google,
iTunes, Firefox, Windows, Blackberry, etc.
(b) Any associated license fees such as game engine or other software licence for mobile
application or game development
(c) Online training fees for programs such as vendor certification examination, etc.
(d) Any domain registration/renewal, hosting/cloud solutions within the scope of mobile/game
application development. However, the release of foreign exchange for these purposes shall not
exceed USD 500 or its equivalent in a calendar year.

(2) ADs may release IT expenses within permissible limit on behalf of individual
developers/freelancers through their notional accounts (digital wallet) maintained with Online
Payment Gateway Service Providers (OPGSPs). In this context, ADs shall observe the
following instructions:
(a) ADs shall arrange required amount in their nostro accounts for settlement of payment
through notional accounts of OPGSPs on post-funding basis.
(b) For execution of online instructions from individual developers/freelancers, ADs shall have
secure and suitable online transaction platform, and arrangement for documentary formalities
before disbursement of funds as per (a) above.
(c) In case of refund due to cancellation of the relative transactions for valid reasons, ADs
shall, on receipt of amount from OPGSPs, refund the same to remitters.
(d) Usual formalities required for outward remittances need to be observed including usual
reporting, deduction of applicable taxes and payment thereof .

--- Page 30 ---
24


(3) Irrespective of above limit, developers/freelancers are permitted to remit their bonafide
business expenses out of balances held in ERQ accounts through digital wallet.

(4) ADs may maintain notional accounts with OPGSPs. ADs shall use the accounts to execute
above transactions on behalf of individual developers/freelancers having no notional accounts
with OPGSPs.

39. Trading at Border Haats

India and Bangladesh have opened 'border haats,' or 'common marketplaces' in different places
of the border of the two countries for carrying on traditional border trade at these places in
terms of the Memorandum of Understanding dated October 23, 2010 signed between the
Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh and the Republic of India. To facilitate
transactions in these haats, it has been decided that pursuant to the authorization conferred by
the Government of Bangladesh under Section 25 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,
1947 (Act VII of 1947), operations of Section 5(1) and 5(3) of the said Act shall remain
suspended in respect of purchases by each individual not exceeding Bangladesh Taka or Indian
Rupee equivalent to USD 100 for any particular day in the border haats. (Please see Appendix-

40. Other private remittances

Applications for remittances by private individuals for purposes other than those mentioned
above should be made on Form TM on which full details of the purpose of the remittance
should be stated and full documentary evidence in support of the application should be
attached. ADs must satisfy themselves regarding the bonafide of each case through personal
knowledge of the applicant, if any, or evidence which the applicant may be able to produce.
After thus satisfying themselves, ADs should certify the application and forward it to the
Bangladesh Bank for consideration. In each case the nationality of the applicant should be
stated and if the applicant is not a resident in Bangladesh, the country of residence of the
applicant should be clearly stated. If the applicant is a foreign national, the period of residence
in Bangladesh and his intention as to future residence should be declared. Particulars of any
permit obtained by him for making monthly remittances to his country of domicile should be
given.

--- Page 31 ---
25

Part-D
REMITTANCES – PROFITS AND DIVIDENDS, ETC.

41. Remittance of profit of branches of foreign firms other than financial institutions

ADs may without prior Bangladesh Bank approval remit abroad the profits of branches of
foreign firms and companies. The foreign firm/company operating in Bangladesh should for
this purpose submit application to its nominated AD duly supported by the following
documents/information:

(1) Submission of documents
(a) Audited Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Account for business done in Bangladesh for
the relevant period.
(b) Consolidated audited Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Account of the company/firm
(head office) for the corresponding period.
(c) Year-wise reconciliation of head office accounts for the period for which profit remittance
is applied for.
(d) Documents regarding payment of taxes in Bangladesh:
(i) A certificate from the Auditors in Bangladesh that tax provision made in the accounts for
the period in question is sufficient to meet all tax liabilities in Bangladesh; or,
(ii) Copies of final assessment orders and forms in respect of all taxes for the period duly
certified and stamped by the department concerned.

(e) Full particulars about additions to fixed assets of the company in Bangladesh, if any, during
the period and source of funds for financing such additions.
(f) Particulars of outstanding borrowings in Bangladesh of the company/firm.
(g) Permission letter of the relevant Government Authorities for carrying on business in
Bangladesh and the terms and conditions thereof.

(2) Examination of documents

ADs shall examine and process the applications for profit remittance as follows:
(a) All past losses should be adjusted either to profit and loss account or general reserve
account.
(b) Additions to fixed assets, furniture and fixture, office equipments, cars etc. will be deducted
from net profit before arriving at the remittable profit. If the additions are financed out of
depreciation, disposals during the year and/or non-repatriable funds received from abroad, no
deduction for these will be made from the profit.
(c) Profit on sale of small fixed assets items like furniture, fixture and equipment and profit on
sale of investments in stocks, shares, bonds, securities etc. may be treated as admissible items
of remittable profit.
(d) The entire amount of the profit on sale of fixed assets acquired for running the normal
business activities of the concern as well as profit on sale of investments in share, securities
etc. acquired out of undistributed remittable profit will also be treated as remittable.

--- Page 32 ---
26

(e) Profit on sale of immovable properties such as land, building, etc. shall be deducted from
remittable profit unless prior permission of Bangladesh Bank has been obtained on application
alongwith
(i) Auditor's certificate about current market value of the immovable property sold
(ii) balance sheet and other papers of the relevant period establishing the book value of the
property on the date of sale
(iii) copy of agreement of sale certified by the Auditor
(iv) papers regarding tax assessment/tax payment on the capital gains from the sale.

(f) Net amount of cash subsidy, if any, granted by the Govt. shall be deducted from profit.

(3) Remittance of profits of Sterling Tea Estate Companies

Further to the requirements of sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) above, applications for remittance of
profits of Sterling Tea Estate Companies should fulfill the following:
(a) The companies will prepare accounts in Taka and apply for remittance in Taka.
(b) The Auditors should certify that the computation of remittable profit and the entire income
for the year has been earned on business authorized by the Memorandum and Articles of
Association of the company and accrued in Bangladesh and that all losses and revenue
liabilities have been adjusted before arriving at the remittable profit. The Auditors must also
certify that in their opinion the accompanying financial statements present fairly the financial
position of the company as of date and the results of its operations and changes in financial
position for the year ended, are in conformity with the generally accepted accounting principles
applied on a business consistent with that of the preceding year and the deviations, if any, have
been reported.
(c) Certified copies of assessment orders and evidence of payment of all income and other
taxes or a certificate from the Auditors of the company that adequate provision has been made
to meet all tax liabilities in Bangladesh, both for the previous years as well as current year
together with the calculation sheet duly certified by the Auditors showing how the tax
provision figure has been arrived at, should be produced.

(4) The firm/company will keep Foreign Exchange Investment Department (FEID),
Bangladesh Bank, Head Office informed beforehand about its nomination of ADs and about
any subsequent change in such nomination. ADs shall determine the Taka amount of the
remittable profit after examining the remittance application in terms of sub-paragraphs (2) and
(3) above and effect remittance of equivalent foreign exchange. After making the remittance
ADs shall forward the remittance application and supporting papers/documents in original to
FEID, Bangladesh Bank for post facto checking within one month of effecting remittance.
Another copy of the remittance application alongwith the approved Form TM shall be
forwarded, to the concerned area office of the Bangladesh Bank with the monthly returns of
ADs.

--- Page 33 ---
27

42. Remittance of profit of banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions

Foreign banks and financial institutions operating in Bangladesh may remit profits to their
head offices abroad through their nominated ADs without prior Bangladesh Bank approval.
Foreign insurance companies operating in Bangladesh may likewise remit the shareholders'
portion of profits through their nominated ADs without prior Bangladesh Bank approval. The
basis for computation of remittable profit and the documents on which the calculations should
be based shall be as follows:

(1) Documents
(a) Audited Balance Sheet and Profit & Loss Account in respect of operation of the foreign
bank/insurance company/financial institution in Bangladesh for the relevant year;
(b) (i) Copies of final assessment orders and forms in respect of all taxes for the period duly
certified and stamped by the taxation authority or (ii) certificate from the Auditors in
Bangladesh that tax provision made in the accounts for the period is sufficient to meet all tax
liabilities;
(c) Certificate authenticated by the Auditor showing particulars of additions to fixed assets in
Bangladesh, if any, during the period alongwith the amount of depreciation made, sale
proceeds of fixed assets disposed of, and the amount of non-repatriable funds received from
abroad to finance capital expenditure during the period;
(d) Auditor's certificate with regard to the income accrued and shown in the books of accounts
but not actually realized on the date of remittance;
(e) In case of insurance companies, Actuary's valuation report relating to the period for which
remittance is to be sent, and approval letter from Insurance Development and Regulatory
Authority (IDRA) regarding remittance of shareholders' portion of profits for the period;
(f) Auditor's certificates regarding adequacy of (i) capital and reserves and (ii) provisioning
against classified loans, advances and other assets required in terms of applicable laws and
regulations; mentioning clearly both the required and the actual levels of capital, reserves and
provisions;
(g) An undertaking from the applicant foreign bank/insurance company/ financial institution
that any amount determined by Bangladesh Bank as having been remitted in excess of the
amount actually remittable shall be repatriated immediately on demand.

(2) Computation of remittable profit

Upon being satisfied about the consistency of the amount applied for remittance with the facts
and figures in the documents listed above, profits as per audited accounts may be remitted after
making necessary deductions on the following counts:
(a) Tax: Tax assessed by the taxation authority or in the event assessment is not completed on
the date of remittance, the amount of tax as provided for in the books of accounts and certified
by the auditors as adequate in accordance with the tax laws;

(b) Additions to fixed assets: Costs of fixed assets, furniture and fixtures, office equipment,
cars etc. acquired/bought during the year minus cost of assets financed out of depreciation, sale

--- Page 34 ---
28

proceeds of assets and those bought with non-repatriable funds from abroad as shown in the
Auditor's certificate referred to in paragraph 42 (1) (c) above;
(c) Profits on sale of immovable assets: Any amount of profit in excess of Tk 10,000 arising
out of sale of immovable assets (land, building etc.) included in the profit;
(d) Income receivable: Any unrealized interest income on adversely classified assets wrongly
credited to income statement.
(e) Irregular income: Excess amount of interest and commission/charges etc. realized and
included in the Profit & Loss Account as detected by Bangladesh Bank inspection teams;
(f) Shortfalls in capital & in provision requirements: Any shortfall in capital & reserves in
Bangladesh and any shortfall in maintenance of provisions against classified loans, advances
and other assets as required in terms of laws and regulations by Bangladesh Bank/other
relevant regulatory authorities from time to time;
(g) Past accumulated losses: All accumulated previous losses.

(3) Submission of documents to Bangladesh Bank for post facto checking

Attested copies of all papers/documents related to remittance of profits of foreign banks,
financial institutions and insurance companies, and head office expenses of foreign banks are
to be forwarded to FEID, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka by ADs, within one month of
remittance, for post facto checking; retaining the originals in their records for inspection by
Bangladesh Bank officials. Any sum remitted in excess (as may be determined by the
Bangladesh Bank during post facto checking) shall have to be repatriated immediately.

43. Head office expenses

(1) Branch operations of foreign banking companies need to share expenses of their head
offices against benefits accrued to operations in Bangladesh. These expenses of head offices
are incurred on account of the general management, administration and strategy of the whole
company including its foreign branches. Head offices allocate these expenses to their branches
in accordance with standard practices. ADs may remit such expenses without prior approval
from Bangladesh Bank subject to observance of the following instructions:
(a) Gross remittable amount (before deduction of source tax) shall not exceed the limit as
allowed in income tax regulations of the country;
(b) The remittance is subject to compliance of taxes regulations like deduction and payment of
applicable source tax and VAT.
(c) Head office expenses need to be supported by certificate issued by the head office auditors
in line with global standard;
(d) The expenses will not be remittable before the close of financial statements;
(e) There should be separate disclosure in the audited Financial Statement for such expenses.

(2) Within 15 days of remittance, a set of documents related to the remittances is to be
forwarded to FEID, Bangladesh Bank; Head Office with an undertaking to the effect that any
amount detected by Bangladesh Bank as excess remittance while post facto checking shall be
repatriated immediately.

--- Page 35 ---
29


44. Remittance of dividend to non-resident shareholders

(1) ADs are allowed to remit dividends (both final and interim) to the non-resident
shareholders on receipt of the application in the prescribed form (Appendix-9) in triplicate
from the companies concerned duly certified by their Auditors and supported by the following
documents:
(a) Attested copy of the certificate of incorporation of the company (to be submitted only
once).
(b) Audited Balance Sheet and Profit & Loss Account of the Company for the year to which
the dividend relates.
(c) Copy, certified by the Auditor, of the Board resolution declaring the dividend.
(d) List of non-resident shareholders to whom dividend is payable.
(e) Certificate from the Auditor of the company to the effect that the taxes payable by the non
resident shareholder on account of the dividend earned has been deducted.
(f) Auditor's certificate to the effect that the provision for income tax and/or any additional
liability (such as surcharge, etc.) in connection with such taxes made in the accounts of the
company is sufficient to meet all past and present tax liabilities of the company in Bangladesh
up to the period for which remittance of dividend is applied for i.e. the provision should cover
not only current year but also the previous years for which taxes have not yet been finally
assessed and paid.
(g) Final income tax assessment order as and when obtained.
(h) Before allowing remittance ADs should ensure that the applicant has given undertaking to
the effect that in case of remittance of any ineligible amount, the amount so remitted will be
repatriated to Bangladesh on demand by Bangladesh Bank/ADs.

(2) Each company will apply for dividend remittances through one nominated AD whose name
should be communicated beforehand to FEID, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka. Any
change in the nominated AD bank should likewise be notified to the Bangladesh Bank well in
advance.

(3) While allowing remittance of dividend ADs should satisfy themselves that profit shown in
the Balance Sheet and Profit & Loss Account has arisen out of the normal trading/business
activities of the company or out of past accumulated reserves which were remittable. In
arriving at the profit out of which dividend has been declared and applied for remittance, ADs
should in particular verify to ensure that all previous losses/tax liabilities, if any, have been
fully adjusted against current year's net profit or against general/revenue reserve. Also, any
cash subsidy granted by Govt. to the company should be deducted from profit in arriving at the
divisible profit, unless allowed otherwise by Bangladesh Bank.

(4) Remittance of dividend should be approved in Taka first and be effected after converting
the Taka into equivalent foreign exchange at the rate ruling on the date of remittance.

--- Page 36 ---
30

(5) Dividend payable to foreign shareholders may be credited to their FC accounts maintained
in Bangladesh, subject to observance of following instructions:
(a) ADs shall satisfy themselves that the fund in equivalent foreign currency to be credited in
FC accounts on account of dividend has arrived in terms of above instructions.
(b) While crediting FC accounts, the transactions shall be treated as outward remittances and
accordingly Form TM procedures need to be followed.
(c) Encashment of balances held in FC accounts shall be treated as inward remittances for
bonafide local disbursements, subject to Form-C procedures.

(6) Reinvestment of dividend

Declared dividend may be used, with treatment as inward remittances for reinvestment in
Bangladesh through purchase of shares in existing companies and/or other companies subject
to observance of following instructions:
(a) Procedures as outlined in this paragraph have been followed regarding the disbursement
dividend to foreign shareholders.
(b) Investee companies shall, within 14 days on issuance of shares in accordance with
regulatory norms, arrange to report with attachment of relevant documents through their
designated ADs to FEID and Statistics Department of Bangladesh Bank, Head Office in
accordance with paragraphs 2(A) and 2(B), chapter 9 of GFET.

(7) ADs will maintain separate company wise record of payment of dividends to the non-
resident shareholders either by remittance or for credit to the Non-resident Investor's Taka
(NITA) Account as the case may be, under the above general permission, so as to facilitate
their inspection by Bangladesh Bank.

(8) Remittance of pre-liberation dividend will, however, require prior approval of Bangladesh
Bank. Such application should be forwarded by ADs to Director (FEID), Bangladesh Bank,
Head Office, Dhaka on Form TM alongwith all requisite documents for approval.

(9) Export of dividend warrants

Dividend warrants can be freely exported to the non-resident shareholders of both Bangladesh
and foreign controlled companies provided the shares have been issued against payments in
foreign exchange received through the banking channel or against payments out of NITA in
the name of the shareholder in accordance with the general approval of Bangladesh Bank
accorded in this behalf.

(10) Remittance of profits to foreign partner in joint venture

For joint venture enterprises, Bangladesh Bank shall allow remittance of the foreign
partner's/collaborator's share of profits on submission of application alongwith audited Balance
Sheet, Profit & Loss Account etc. and other papers as per instructions contained in this
paragraph.

--- Page 37 ---
31


45. Outward remittances on account of service payments by subsidiaries of foreign
companies

(1) Purchases of recurrent services by subsidiaries from or through overseas parent/group firms
or their associates comparable to those available locally enable related party transactions. It is
observed that resident companies operating in Bangladesh as subsidiaries of foreign companies
avail different services from their parents/group companies abroad. In view of the situation and
to facilitate transactions between subsidiaries and parent/group companies, ADs may allow
remittances on behalf of local subsidiaries against services from or through parent/group
companies or their associates provided that:
(a) The services are not locally available;
(b) The subsidiaries are controlled by parent/group companies by holding shares exceeding 50
percent;
(c) Gross remittable amount (before deduction of source tax) shall not exceed 10 percent of net
profit in an accounting year.

(2) For the purpose of remittance facility under this authority, parent/group controlled
subsidiaries shall mean those companies as defined in paragraph 4 of FE Circular No 34, dated
September 02, 2025.

However, the facility will be applicable for companies with shares held by foreign
companies/investors less than 50 percent (i) as per relevant regulatory requirements, if any, in
Bangladesh, and/or (ii) in case of business activities of respective companies dependent on
foreign investor-companies;

(3) Before allowing remittances, ADs shall observe following instructions:
(a) ADs shall obtain underlying contracts including invoices;
(b) The price of services is competitive;
(c) The remittance is subject to compliance of taxes regulations like deduction and payment of
applicable source tax and VAT, including transfer pricing;
(d) Periodical payments shall be admissible based on reasonable estimation of profit certified
by auditors;
(e) Undertaking from remitter-subsidiaries is to be received to the effect that necessary
adjustments shall be made in the following year in case of excess payment due to non-
achievement of profit as per estimation.

(4) The facility under this authorization will be inadmissible for remittances requiring
permission from competent authorities; and this will be mutually exclusive for transactions
with parent/group companies if granted generally or specifically.

(5) The facility shall be available through a branch of an AD designated by the applicant. For
any intended change in this respect, the relevant file shall be transferred direct to the concerned
new AD branch on written request by the applicant.

--- Page 38 ---
32


(6) As usual, ADs shall report the transactions to Bangladesh Bank in the online reporting
module and usual monthly returns/statements.

(7) In case of service payments requiring more than the limit set above, subsidiaries should
send applications, through their designated ADs, to Bangladesh Bank accompanied by
following documents:
(a) Draft copies of agreements or Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to be signed between
subsidiaries and parent/group companies abroad;
(b) Documents as evidence of price competitiveness of services;
(c) Documents or statement(s) justifying the unavoidable necessity of obtaining services from
parent/group companies abroad or that such services cannot be provided by local service
providers;
(d) Certificate from auditors regarding sources tax and VAT, base of calculation of source tax
and obligatory of taxes with reference to relevant provisions of tax laws, rules and regulations.

--- Page 39 ---
33

Part-E
INSTITUTIONAL REMITTANCES

46. Remittance of cost of training, consultancy services and other fees

(1) Industrial enterprises producing for local markets and service sector industries may remit
through their nominated ADs up to 1 (one) percent of annual sales as declared in their previous
year's income tax return or USD 100,000, whichever is higher, towards costs of training and
consultancy services as per relevant contract with the foreign trainer/consultant, and prior
approval of Bangladesh Bank will not be required for such remittances.

(2) The authorization shall be applicable to all sectors under the prevailing Industrial Policy,
excluding banks and financial institutions such as finance companies, insurance companies,
capital market intermediaries, micro finance institutions, etc.

(3) The above authorization is to include legitimate other current account payments like audit
fee, certification fee, commissioning fee, testing fee, valuation fee, etc. within the purview of
the above stated regulation. However, this will exclude payments which require permission
from competent authorities without limiting to paragraph 47 below. ADs shall, while
undertaking the transactions, satisfy themselves to the effect that regulations regarding
deductions and payments of taxes at source, value added taxes and other levies applicable on
the payments have duly been complied with. This facility and other permissible remittances
will be mutually exclusive.

(4) The above facilities shall equally be applicable to industrial enterprises operating in
domestic processing areas of EZs having sales in Taka. However, in case of the availability of
foreign exchange in the respective FC accounts, out of legitimate sources, of concerned
customers, ADs will first use such balances before utilization of their own sources by
conversion of Taka fund.

(5) While processing remittances, ADs shall satisfy themselves that the cases are not remittable
under specific authorization. The authority does not waive the requirements of consent, if any,
from competent authorities. Accordingly, ADs shall ensure before effecting remittances that
such consent has duly been issued in favor of respective remitters. As usual, ADs shall dispose
requests for remittances on account of royalty, technical knowledge/technical know-how fee,
technical assistance fee and franchise fee under the Guidelines of the Bangladesh Investment
Development Authority (BIDA) as per stipulations outlined at paragraph 47 below.

(6) ADs shall observe due diligence with regards to customers‟ KYC and AML/CFT standards,
reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank and so on.

47. Application of Bangladesh Investment Development Authority Act, 2016 for payment
of royalty, fees for technical knowledge or technical assistance and franchise fees to
foreign persons or institutes

--- Page 40 ---
34

(1) Section 18 of Bangladesh Investment Development Authority Act, 2016 requires approved
industrial enterprises to make applications to the Authority for payment of royalty, fees for
technical knowledge or technical assistance and franchise fees to foreign persons or institutes
in accordance with the prescribed manner as defined by BIDA. Accordingly, private sector
industrial enterprises as defined in Section 15(3) of the Act shall have approval from BIDA for
such remittances.

(2) BIDA has issued Circular No. 03.08.2680.224.165.1479.2017/59 of March 03, 2021
regarding the guidelines for outward remittances on account of royalty, technical
knowledge/technical know-how fee(s), technical assistance fee(s) and franchise fee(s).
Schedule 1 appended with the guidelines contains permissible amount of fee(s) to be remitted
without BIDA‟s approval. In accommodating the requests for specified remittance under
general authorization, ADs shall observe the instructions of the guidelines. In case of advance
payment permitted in accordance with guidelines of BIDA, ADs shall observe relevant
regulatory instructions stipulated herein.

(3) Transactions under the authorization shall be executed by one AD bank branch nominated
by remitters. For any intended change in this respect, the relevant files shall be transferred
direct to the concerned new AD branch on written request by remitters. ADs shall, before
effecting the transactions, have been ensured of deductions and payments of source taxes, VAT
and other levies applicable against the remittances. As usual, ADs shall comply with Section
3(4) of FER Act, 1947, including observance of due diligence with regards to KYC and
AML/CFT standards, reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank under Foreign Exchange
regulations, preserve customer-wise documents and so on.

48. Outward remittances on account of payment of royalty, fees for technical knowledge
or technical assistance and franchise fees

On receipt of applications in terms of BIDA‟s guidelines together with approval, if required,
following instructions shall be observed by ADs before execution of remittances:

(1) ADs shall be ensured that they are nominated for the remittances as per approval letter
issued by BIDA;
(2) ADs shall be satisfied that applicable taxes payable on remittable amounts have duly been
deducted and paid;
(3) ADs shall satisfy themselves about the genuineness of the relevant documents. They will
immediately contact with BIDA in case of any doubt.
(4) As usual, ADs shall preserve customer-wise documents for eventual examination by
Bangladesh Bank inspection team and shall report the transactions to Bangladesh Bank.

49. Remittance on account of royalty, technical know-how and technical assistance fees
for DPAs of EZs: ADs may, on behalf of industrial enterprises in Domestic Processing Areas
(DPAs) of Economic Zones (EZs), effect outward remittance on account of royalty, technical

--- Page 41 ---
35

know-how and technical assistance fees from taka account subject to observance of the
instructions stipulated below:

(1) for new projects, not exceeding 6 (six) percent of the cost of imported machinery;

(2) for ongoing concerns, not exceeding 6 (six) percent of the previous year's sales as declared
in the income tax returns.

(3) Remittance of such fees in excess of the prescribed limit is subject to prior specific
approval from BEZA.

(4) In case of the availability of foreign exchange out of legitimate sources in the respective FC
accounts of concerned customers, ADs shall first use such balances before utilization of their
own sources by conversion of Taka fund. ADs shall, in no circumstances, utilize the combined
sources for making outward remittances on behalf of industrial enterprises operating in export
processing areas of EZs.

(5) ADs shall, before effecting the transactions, satisfy themselves that the industrial
enterprises do not have sources of income in foreign currency and shall have been ensured of
deductions and payments of applicable taxes.

(6) ADs shall comply with Section 3(4) of FER Act, 1947, including observance of due
diligence with regards to KYC and AML/CFT standards, reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank
and so on.

50. Employment of overseas agents, etc.

(1) Prior permission of Bangladesh Bank is required by persons or firms in Bangladesh who
wish to employ the services of agents abroad, whether on regular or intermittent basis.

(2) Applications for this purpose should be made by letter giving full details of the nature and
value of the business transacted in the past by the applicant, the existing arrangements and the
nature of the proposed arrangements to be made with the overseas agents and where approved,
applications for remittances should be made on Form TM quoting reference of the approval of
the facility by Bangladesh Bank.

51. Opening of branches abroad

(1) Prior approval of Bangladesh Bank is not required by the residents in Bangladesh for
opening of offices abroad. They are however required to report the same to Bangladesh Bank
within one month of opening of such offices, as per Appendix-10. Companies/firms shall,
through ADs, regularly submit to FEID, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office periodical statements
of accounts of these offices/subsidiary companies abroad; any net surplus of earning over
routine current expenses/net profit of such offices are to be promptly repatriated to Bangladesh.

--- Page 42 ---
36


(2) Residents in Bangladesh shall mean those legal resident entities other than banks and
finance companies licensed under the Bank Company Act, 1991 and Finance Company Act,
2023 respectively.

(3) Remittance of up to USD 30,000 or equivalent may be made annually to meet current
expenses of such offices opened abroad by a commercial or industrial concern. Such
remittance may only be made in the names of concerned offices/subsidiary companies abroad.
ADs shall examine following papers before effecting remittances:
(a) approval letter of the competent authority of the country concerned for opening the office in
that country.
(b) lease agreement relating to the premises.

(4) In no way, this authorization is useable for equity remittance to establish subsidiaries
abroad. Henceforth, „subsidiary companies‟ as stated in the aforesaid paragraph shall stand
repealed. ADs shall satisfy itself about the actual necessity of remitting funds by examining
the actual and/or estimated incomes and expenses of the office abroad as revealed from its
audited accounts and the other papers; and remit funds to the extent found necessary, subject to
the prescribed ceiling. Before effecting remittances for subsequent years ADs shall verify the
renewed lease agreement (if applicable) and other related vouchers.

52. Advertisement of Bangladeshi products in mass media abroad

(1) ADs may without prior Bangladesh Bank approval effect remittance towards cost of
advertisement of Bangladeshi products in mass media abroad. Remittance applications from
the companies/firms in Bangladesh should be supported by the invoice from the foreign mass
media concerned, and the applicant will have to submit copy of ADs advertisement within one
month of its issuance. ADs shall preserve the invoice, application and advertisement copy for
post facto checking by inspection officials of Bangladesh Bank.

(2) ADs may also effect remittance towards cost of advertisement of Bangladeshi products in
foreign electronic and online media in dynamic, image, video, interactive and/or other formats.

(3) ADs may effect remittances on behalf of their advertisement agency-customers circulating
advertisements in foreign media for resident entities. In this context, ADs shall obtain
applications containing the followings:
(a) Copy of valid agreements;
(b) Copy of invoices;
(c) Statements showing surplus position after deduction of (i) remittable amount, (ii) taxes, (iii)
other expenses, etc. from gross collection, pertaining to the relevant transactions;
(d) Documentary evidences in support of deduction and payment of all applicable taxes;
(e) An undertaking from the applicant to the effect that, in case of wrong or excess remittance,
the amount remitted will be repatriated to Bangladesh immediately on demand.

--- Page 43 ---
37

(4) ADs shall effect payments upon satisfying relevant statements. ADs shall also ensure that
remittable fund is arranged from respective collections.

(5) Transactions under the authorization shall be executed by one AD bank branch nominated
by remitters. For any intended change in this respect, the relevant files shall be transferred
direct to the concerned new AD branch on written request by remitters.

(6) As usual, ADs shall comply with Section 3(4) of FER Act, 1947, including observance of
due diligence with regards to KYC and AML/CFT standards, reporting routine to Bangladesh
Bank, preserve customer-wise documents and so on.

53. Remittance of aircraft lease rental by airlines incorporated in Bangladesh

(1) ADs may effect remittances on account of lease rentals by the airlines incorporated in
Bangladesh up to the guaranteed hours subject to bonafide according to the following drill:
(a) Application and required documents:
(i) Application of the applicant company;
(ii) Permission letter of competent authority allowing to operate the rental aircraft in favor of
the applicant company;
(iii) Copy of valid agreement;
(iv) Copy of invoices;
(v) An audited statement showing the opening balance, earning, expenditure and net amount
(surplus/deficit) pertaining to the operation of rental aircraft;
(vi) Proof of challans pertaining to payment of all applicable taxes or certificate of exemption
issued by relevant tax authority;
(vii) An undertaking from the applicant company to the effect that, in case of wrong or excess
remittance, the amount remitted will be repatriated to Bangladesh immediately on demand.

(b) Examination and processing by ADs:
(i) ADs shall ensure that the applicant is regular in submission of returns to Bangladesh Bank
and repatriation of surplus earnings in accordance with FE Circular No. 21, dated July 18, 2018
and its subsequent circulars.
(ii) After scrutinizing the application along with the supporting documents submitted and
establishing the bonafide, AD shall effect the remittance. In this case, ADs shall utilize first
foreign currency fund, if any, in their FC account and later remainder from Taka accounts.
(iii) ADs shall maintain separate file for each company for verification by Bangladesh Bank
inspection team and report the transactions to the concerned area office of Bangladesh Bank.

(2) Remittances under authority of this circular may only be made through an AD branch
designated by the remitters for the purpose with intimation to Bangladesh Bank, head
office/concerned area office of Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 44 ---
38

54. Outward remittances on account of bandwidth/internet and related service import

(1) ADs may effect remittances to beneficiaries/designated parties abroad on account of
bandwidth/internet service import by the business entities incorporated in Bangladesh subject
to observance of the following instructions:
(a) ADs shall obtain application containing the followings:
(i) copy of valid licenses issued by competent authorities for respective service;
(ii) copy of agreements within related parties;
(iii) copy of regulatory approvals from BTRC and other competent authorities in applicable
cases;
(iv) copy of relevant invoices;
(v) documentary evidences pertaining to payment of all applicable taxes or certificate of
exemption issued by concerned tax authority;
(vi) an undertaking from the applicant company to the effect that, in case of wrong or excess
remittance, the amount remitted will be repatriated to Bangladesh immediately on demand.

(2) ADs shall effect payments upon satisfying themselves with the genuineness of the
remittance requests and sources of funds through reviewing applicable regulatory approvals,
NOCs, licenses, financial statements, etc. In this respect, ADs shall obtain relevant documents
along with audited statements of earnings, expenses, net position (surplus/deficit) pertaining to
the payments. Audited statements should also include collection amount originated from sales
of imported bandwidth service. ADs shall ensure that remittable fund is arranged from
respective business sources and required regulatory reporting is met.

(3) ADs shall maintain separate files for each remitter-customer for verification by Bangladesh
Bank inspection team, observe routine reports to Bangladesh Bank and comply with
AML/CFT standards.

(4) Remittances under the authority of this circular may only be made through a designated AD
branch with intimation to Bangladesh Bank, head office/concerned area office of Bangladesh
Bank.

55. Software maintenance/support fees

(1) ADs may effect remittances on account of software maintenance/support fees, usage fees
for cloud services, IT infrastructure and remote software applications. ADs shall, while
effecting remittances, observe the following instructions:
(a) ADs shall have to be ensured of the concerned software having legitimate license;
(b) ADs shall obtain valid agreements for the maintenance/support services executed with
foreign service providers.
(c) Remittance requests from the remitters shall be supported by invoices;
(d) Undertaking from remitters to the effect that they have not remitted the payments from
other ADs and shall not do the same in future, and they will bring back the remitted amount or
its parts in case of non-receipt or partial receipt of services.

--- Page 45 ---
39

(e) Regulations regarding payments of tax at source, value added taxes and other levies
applicable on the payments need to be complied with.

(2) In the context of subsequent payments, ADs shall observe relevant instructions as noted
above and certificates from service recipients regarding satisfactory use of services against
earlier payments.

(3) The above facilities shall equally be applicable to banks having approval from their own
competent authorities and industrial enterprises operating in domestic processing areas of EZs
having sales in Taka. However, in case of the availability of foreign exchange out of legitimate
sources in the respective FC accounts of concerned customers of EZs, ADs shall first use such
balances before utilization of their own sources by conversion of Taka fund.

(4) The transactions under the above authorization shall be executed by an AD designated by
remitters who can change ADs as per mutual understanding. In case of change, designated AD
shall forward the remittance files direct to new designated AD with intimation to Bangladesh
Bank. As usual, ADs shall observe due diligence with regards to customers‟ KYC and
AML/CFT standards, reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank and so on.

(5) To facilitate the stated service arrangements, ADs may effect remittances on behalf of their
arranger-customers routing respective services to the ultimate users. In this context, ADs shall–
(a) obtain justification for sourcing the stated services from abroad,
(b) satisfy themselves regarding bonafide business requirements,
(c) conduct due diligence to ensure services are being arranged under valid agreements and
have legitimate collections, covering remittances, applicable taxes, mark-up, etc., from their
customers.

(6) ADs shall comply with regulatory framework as stated above as subject to authorization, if
required, from competent authorities.

56. Remittance for academic/research journal subscription

ADs may allow remittance of subscription fee for academic/research journals, subscription fees
of academic software and cloud based educational services to be procured from abroad by
public universities and medical colleges, recognized national research/training institutions,
University Grants Commission (UGC) approved private universities and Govt. approved
private medical colleges up to USD 15,000 or equivalent for an institution per calendar year
against production of invoice/relevant supporting documents subject to establishment of
bonafide. Such remittances are to be reported to Bangladesh Bank.

57. Registration fee on account of medical check-up for migrant workers

(1) Migrant workers before proceeding abroad may need medical check-up with medical
centers approved by the concerned countries for which candidate-wise registration fee is

--- Page 46 ---
40

payable to the approving authorities of the countries. In such cases ADs may, upon request
from approved medical centers, remit fee to the bank account of the beneficiaries on account of
registration fee for medical check-up services to migrant workers subject to production of
invoice specifying details of the check-up and deduction of applicable taxes.

(2) In accordance with the requirement of Gulf Health Council (GHC) regarding online
registration
and
payment
for
medical
check-up,
ADs
may
issue
international
debit/prepaid/credit Card in favor of Bangladeshi medical centers accredited by GHC to pay
only the registration fee for medical check-up services of Bangladeshi nationals proceeding
abroad for employment in member countries of Gulf Cooperation Council. Each medical center
may avail only one card from any one of the card issuing banks. In this regard, ADs shall
meticulously follow the instructions regarding reporting requirements of international card.

58 (1) Subscriptions to foreign media services

On applications from the local newspapers, ADs may remit foreign exchange towards cost of
subscription of news items, features, articles of foreign news agencies. Remittance should be
made on the basis of (a) contracts entered into between the applicant and the foreign news
agency and (b) NOC of the Ministry of Information.

(2) Bank‟s own subscriptions/charges
(a) ADs are allowed to make remittances on account of their own subscription for availing
recurring services required for day-to-day international transactions, without limiting to
Reuters monitor, SWIFT, Bloomberg, bankers almanac, due diligence repository services,
credit rating services, price verification services and so on.
(b) ADs may effect remittances towards settlement of dues to foreign banks of bank charges,
cost of cables & other incidental charges arising in their normal course of the business without
prior Bangladesh Bank approval. All such remittances should be reported to the Bangladesh
Bank alongwith appropriate return.
(c) ADs may effect remittance towards cost of agent services of legal process under the USA
PATRIOT Act of 2001 after satisfying themselves with the genuineness of the request through
agreement/proforma invoice duly accepted and after deducting all applicable taxes.
(d) Shipment tracking charges: ADs may effect remittances on account of shipment tracking
charges; subject to observance of the following instructions:
(i) ADs shall have tie-up arrangements with globally recognized shipment tracking service
providers;
(ii) ADs shall receive shipment tracking information through secure communication
channels/automatic system generated paths;
(iii) Remittance requests from service providers abroad shall be supported by invoices;
(iv) Regulations regarding payment of tax at source, value added taxes and other levies
applicable on the payments need to be complied with.
(v) To economize transaction costs, ADs may establish tie-up arrangements with other ADs
having arrangements with shipment tracking service providers abroad, for receiving the
particular services. Payments between them will be settled in Taka. Service providing ADs

--- Page 47 ---
41

may remit, in accordance with 2 above, the payments abroad payable against the services
rendered to other ADs. ADs shall observe due diligence regarding AML/CFT standards,
reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank and so on.


(3) Lounge visit facilities

ADs may allow remittances on account of payments related to lounge visit facilities availed by
their customers-travelers holding international cards, subject to the ceiling in aggregate not
exceeding 500 US Dollar or equivalent per cardholder in a calendar year.

(4) Transactions of capital market intermediaries

To facilitate smooth functioning of capital market transactions, ADs may remit fees abroad on
account of services relating to financial data and communication services such as Reuters
monitor, Bloomberg etc. In this context, ADs need to be ensured that applicants - brokerage
firms, merchant banks, asset management company, etc. are duly licensed by Bangladesh
Securities Exchange Commission

59. Remittance on account of legal expenses of banks

Banks may need to be involved in legal proceedings abroad for taking legal action against any
party thereon or to face any litigation abroad sued against them. In both of the cases, bank may
require outward remittance(s) of foreign exchange. Prior approval of Bangladesh Bank will be
required for making any remittance for the first time needed for such legal proceedings.
However, once permission is granted for any case for the first time, subsequent remittances (if
any) needed for the same case may be done without prior permission of Bangladesh Bank.
While applying to Bangladesh Bank for such remittance, ADs shall have to submit the opinion
of its own legal adviser regarding justification of being involved to the litigation and prospect
for winning thereto along with permission of the board of directors of the bank concerned for
participating in such legal proceedings.


60. General Average Payment

(1) There is a General Average Act when an extraordinary sacrifice or expenditure is
intentionally and reasonably made or incurred for the common safety for the purpose of
preserving from peril the property involved in a common maritime adventure. To protect a ship
and a major portion of its cargo from peril, the captain may declare General Average. To
determine losses arising from General Average Act the captain then appoints an Adjuster. The
General Average Adjuster sends report to the concerned parties stating therein the amount of
loss, the share of each in the loss and the destination to which the share is to be remitted. In this
context the insurance companies may apply to ADs for remittance abroad of the amount
representing the shares of consignees insured by them, with the following document:

--- Page 48 ---
42

(a) Final Report of the General Average Adjuster
(b) Marine Cargo Policy
(c) Copy of Letter of Credit (LC)/contract
(d) Bill of Lading
(e) Invoice
(f) Average guarantee
(g) Form TM and declaration as per Appendix-11
(h) Declaration from Shadaharan Bima Corporation alongwith the list showing names of the
insurance companies concerned with the General Average.

(2) Before allowing remittance, ADs shall satisfy themselves that the names of the company
mentioned in the Marine Policy, of the ship, of the consignor and the consignee, the quantity of
goods and price mentioned in the invoice, bill of lading no. and the quantity of goods
mentioned therein, the quantity of goods and value mentioned in the LCs/contract the quantity
of goods and value mentioned in the Average Guarantee etc. are consistent with the details
contained in the General Average Adjuster's report. If all the documents and papers are found
in order, ADs may approve Form TM and effect remittance on account of the General Average
contribution applied for. All the papers and documents are to be preserved for eventual post
facto checking by inspection team of Bangladesh Bank.

61. Outward remittances on account of project related expenses

(1) To facilitate transactions for implementation of the Government projects, general
authorization is hereby accorded to designated ADs for effecting remittances on account of
consultancy fees, management fees and other relevant current service fees; subject to
observance of the following instructions:
(a) The concerned projects shall have duly been approved by the competent authorities of the
Government, including financial authorization;
(b) There shall have agreements with the beneficiaries abroad;
(c) Every request for remittance shall be supported by invoices from the beneficiaries abroad
and certificate from the project authorities regarding receipt of concerned services;
(d) Taxes regulations regarding payment of tax at source, value added taxes and other levies
applicable on bill value need to be complied with.

(2) Outward remittances in accordance with the above authorizations shall be effected by AD
branches designated by the project authorities/project implementing entities. AD branches
shall, being designated, intimate it to Bangladesh Bank before execution of remittances.

(3) Remittances on account of royalty, fees for technical knowledge or technical assistance and
franchise fees to foreign persons or institutes are subject to compliance with the Guidelines
issued by BIDA (paragraph 47 of this circular).

(4) As usual, ADs shall comply with Section 3(4) of FER Act, 1947, including observance of
due diligence of KYC, AML/CFT standards, reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank and so on.

--- Page 49 ---
43


62. Membership fee to foreign professional and scientific institutions

ADs may allow remittances on account of membership/affiliation fees payable by local
business/professional entities to the professional/scientific institutions abroad without prior
permission of Bangladesh Bank in terms of paragraph 28.

63. Remittance facilities to IT/software firms

(1) ADs may remit up to USD 40,000 on behalf of IT/software firms in a calendar year on
account of international alliance/software registration fee, domain registration/hosting fee,
server maintenance fee, account verification/remittance test fee, etc. without prior approval of
Bangladesh Bank subject to compliance of the following drill:
(a) ADs shall ensure that the services against which fees have been paid are subsequently
provided for;
(b) Invoice/demand note from the beneficiary abroad along with relative documents will have
to be attached to the application for remittance;
(c) ADs shall ensure deduction of applicable tax and payment thereof;
(d) An undertaking from the applicant company to the effect that, in case of wrong or excess
remittance, the amount remitted will be repatriated to Bangladesh immediately on demand.
(e) BASIS will issue letter of recommendation for a particular firm to a specific AD of
applicant's choice. All subsequent letters of recommendations are to be addressed to the same
AD. ADs shall maintain separate file for each firm to ensure maintenance of limit as mentioned
above for verification by Bangladesh Bank inspection team.
(f) Within the limit of USD 40,000, ADs may issue international card favoring a nominated
official of IT/Software firm for USD 8,000 with the recommendation of BASIS. The
international card may be refilled for another USD 8,000 subject to production of documents
evidencing the fact that the previous transactions were carried out for the purposes mentioned
above. ADs shall ensure that the aggregate amount of refills of international card and outward
payment through other means do not exceed USD 40,000 in a calendar year. ADs shall report
the transactions to the concerned area office of Bangladesh Bank.

(2) This yearly entitlement will be usable by IT/Software firms for meeting bonafide current
needs including but without limiting to digital marketing expenses. However, ADs shall
comply with the instructions contained in paragraph 47 of this circular regarding the
requirements of approval, if any, from BIDA in case of remittance on account of royalty, fees
for technical knowledge or technical assistance and franchise fees to foreign persons or
institutes.

64. Remittance facilities to e-Commerce firms

(1) ADs may allow annual remittance facilities of USD 10,000 or its equivalent to a member
firm of e-Commerce Association of Bangladesh (e-CAB) for meeting bonafide current
expenses abroad through traditional banking channel or card channel. In this case, ADs may

--- Page 50 ---
44

issue refillable international credit/prepaid card with USD 2,000 to the nominated official of
the remitter within the limit. Aggregate refills in cards and remittances by banking channel
shall not exceed total limit of USD 10,000 in a calendar year.

(2) Outward remittances on account of royalty, technical knowledge/technical know-how fee,
technical assistance fee and franchise fee shall be guided by the guidelines of BIDA; and
authorization as noted above will not be applicable for these purposes.

(3) Transactions under the above authorization shall be executed by a single AD bank branch
nominated by remitters. For any intended change of AD branch, the relevant files shall be
transferred direct to the concerned new AD branch on written request by eligible firms.

(4) ADs shall comply with relevant other instructions including deduction and payments of
applicable taxes at sources, VAT and other levies, recommendation from e-CAB, reporting
routine to Bangladesh Bank and so on.

65. Outward remittance of commission earnings of 'foreign brokerage firm' against
service rendered to foreign portfolio investors in Bangladesh

(1) Local stock brokerage firms acting on behalf of foreign stock brokerage firms (registered
and operating abroad) to aid foreign portfolio investors for trading of securities through NITAs
in Bangladesh can remit share of commission earnings to their foreign counterpart brokerage
firms through ADs without prior approval of Bangladesh Bank subject to observance of the
following stipulations:
(a) The local brokerage firm (agent) shall have required permission from relevant Government
Bodies (including BSEC) to operate their business in Bangladesh.
(b) The local brokerage firm shall request concerned AD for necessary arrangement to remit
commissions/fees abroad with documents/information as mentioned in [FBC-1 (Appendix-
12)].
(c) Only commission/service charge earned from trading of securities of the foreign investors
through BO Account opened with the concerned brokerage firm/securities custodian bank and
NITAs (opened with any AD) shall be considered for sharing with the foreign brokerage firm
after deduction of taxes and other items (if any) for subsequent remittance to abroad in
accordance with the agreement signed between the two parties.

(2) Local brokerage firm (agent) shall request ADs for the purpose of remittance to foreign
brokerage firm (principal) abroad. Commission/service charge payable to the foreign stock
brokerage firm shall be determined on monthly basis [FBC-2(Appendix-13)] in accordance
with the agreement signed between the two parties. The statement must be certified by the
auditor of the local agent. Supporting documents should contain information relating to
transaction volume against stock trading on behalf of non-resident portfolio investors, amount
of commission/service charge earned and the amount payable to the principal on account of
commission/service charge. Commission/service charge earned in one month may be remitted

--- Page 51 ---
45

in any subsequent month. Applications to ADs should be accompanied by invoices raised by
the brokerage firm abroad for the claimed amount.

(3) ADs shall report the transactions as per [FBC-2 (Appendix-13)]and supporting documents
with usual monthly returns to FEOD, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office/concerned Office of
Bangladesh Bank following the month of remittance. Besides, consolidated information about
remittance of commission earnings shall have to be reported to FEID, Head Office/concerned
Office of Bangladesh Bank on half yearly basis (Jan-June information to be submitted by next
August and July-Dec information to be submitted by next February) in the format in [FBC-3
(Appendix-14)] for post facto checking.

(4) ADs and Brokerage firms shall also adhere to the instructions applicable for agents working
on behalf for foreign principals.

66. Remittances for webinar solution services

(1) ADs may effect remittances on account of actual payments against relevant invoices of
webinar solution services, subject to payment of applicable taxes/levies. The authorization will
also be applicable for payments against own use by ADs.

(2) In case of requirement for online payments against above mentioned services, ADs may
issue virtual card or one time card in the name of the nominated official of the applicant
entities.

(3) ADs shall observe due diligence with regards to KYC and AML/CFT standards and
reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank.

67. Mobile operators’ receipt of roaming bills in Taka and corresponding outward
remittances

Mobile operators in Bangladesh can accept payments from a customer in Taka; up to a
maximum of Tk 6,000 per trip and Tk 30,000 over a calendar year. Mobile operators shall
follow the following instructions while activating roaming services:

(1) The above mentioned limit cannot be exceeded in aggregate for use of more than one
mobile number/operator;

(2) The traveler shall have valid visa, if applicable, and ticket;

(3) Roaming services should be activated one week before the journey.

--- Page 52 ---
46

68. Regarding payments to network operators abroad, ADs may make outward
remittances in observance of the following instructions:

(1) ADs shall obtain applications containing-
(a) Copy of agreements;
(b) Copy of invoices;
(c) Documentary evidences related to the payment of all applicable taxes.

(2) ADs shall obtain separate statements showing earnings by customers with detailed
information (mobile number, NID, passport number) and overseas payables thereon.

(3) An undertaking from the mobile operator to the effect that they have allowed roaming
services in Taka to their customers up to the limit set by Bangladesh Bank.

(4) After scrutinizing the application along with the supporting documents submitted and
establishing the bonafide, ADs shall remit the payments. In this case, ADs shall utilize first
foreign currency fund, if any, in their admissible FC accounts and the remainder from Taka
accounts.

(5) Remittances under the authorization of this circular may only be made through a designated
AD branch with intimation to Bangladesh Bank, concerned department/concerned area office
of Bangladesh Bank.

69. Outward remittance by local satellite channel distributor to principal abroad

(1) Outward remittance required by the Local Satellite Channel Distributors toward their
Principals abroad may be remitted by ADs subject to obtaining prior permission from
Bangladesh Bank. It is mandatory that the annual audited balance sheet of the local distributor
will have clear information about the income received from this sector. In that case, amount
determined after adjustment of commission receivable by the agent/distributor as mentioned in
the contract, government tax and others, if any, from the gross income, can be remitted abroad
after obtaining permission from Bangladesh Bank. To obtain permission for remittance, the
concerned AD bank shall submit the following documents to Bangladesh Bank after proper
scrutiny thereof:
(a) A statement containing information on monthly collection of fees by individual cable
operator; government tax paid by the cable operators; amount receivable by the local
agent/distributor as fees; other deductibles (if any) and amount to be remitted in favour of the
foreign principal(s);
(b) Copy of the monthly statement of revenue collected from the local customers by the
agent/distributor;
(c) Copy of invoice received from the foreign principal(s) (based on the statement of monthly
collections).
(d) The auditors' certificate on outward remittance stating whether tax at source is deductible
or not, if so whether tax at source has been deducted or not;

--- Page 53 ---
47

(e) Copy of TIN Certificate and copy of documents pertaining to the payment of deducted
income tax;
(f) An undertaking by Chief Executive of the agent/distributor (as per Appendix-15) to the
effect that in case of excess remittance to the foreign principal(s) due to error in calculation or
by mistake or otherwise, the amount so remitted will be brought back/repatriated/adjusted;
(g) Audited Balance Sheet, Profit and Loss A/C Statement and other financial statements for
the year to which the remittance relates;
(h) Number of imported Decoder(s)/IRD(s) by the distributor from the principal (as per Letter
of Permission from the Office of Chief Controller of Export and Import, Commercial Invoice
and Packing List) and a detailed list of cable operators to whom the Decoder(s)/IRD(s)
was(were) distributed.

(2) On being satisfied about the genuineness/correctness of the documents listed above, ADs
on behalf of the agent/distributor shall apply to FEOD, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office along
with Form TM and all other necessary/relevant documents for sending remittance abroad.
Remittance can only be made after obtaining approval from the above mentioned department.

70. Remittances on account of DTH (Direct to Home)

Bangladesh Bank will also consider applications from ADs on behalf of their customers for
remitting subscription fees abroad on account of DTH (Direct to Home). ADs shall forward
their customers‟ applications on case to case basis to FEOD, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office
along with relevant documents as noted below:

(a) Statement from the customers regarding establishment of DTH technology and capacity to
distribute services to local customers;
(b) Copy of permission letter from Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission
(BTRC) and Ministry of Information for providing the services;
(c) Copy of permission letter from Ministry of Information to remit the fees to the foreign
counterparts;
(d) Copy of agreement duly signed by the foreign counterparts and authenticated by
Bangladesh Embassy therein;
(e) Copy of invoices from the foreign counterparts;
(f) Statement of monthly receipts from DTH services, channel subscription fees payable and
sources of money for the remittances;
(g) The auditors‟ certificate on outward remittance stating whether tax at source is deductible
or not, if so whether tax at source has been deducted or not; applicable value added taxes there
against have duly been paid;
(h) Before executing remittance requests, ADs shall obtain business projection of the following
five years along with last year‟s audited financial reports;
(i) Undertaking from the customers to the effect that in case of excess remittances abroad due
to error in calculation or by mistake or otherwise, the amount so remitted will be brought
back/repatriated/ adjusted.

--- Page 54 ---
48

71. Sales of foreign digital items through local e-Commerce market places/platforms

(1) Sales of digital items at e-Commerce market places/platforms to the residents against
payments in local currency shall contravene the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act, 1947 unless settlement of payments against the procurement for commercial trading from
external sources has been made by outward remittance through banking channel under general
authorization. The procurements are subject to payment of applicable duties, taxes and other
levies.

(2) Digital items purchased under individual or corporate entitlements of foreign exchange
cannot be placed at e-Commerce market places/platforms for sales.

(3) Customers‟ due diligence needs to be observed along with AML/CFT provisions before
uploading merchants to market places/platforms.

(4) ADs are advised to guide their e-Commerce customers for meticulous compliance in
accordance with stipulations outlined in the above paragraphs.

--- Page 55 ---
49

Part-F
EXPORT CLAIMS

72. Remittances against export claims

(1) ADs may remit export claims not exceeding 10(ten) percent of the repatriated export
proceeds on the following counts:
(a) Short weight claim;
(b) Quality claim;
(c) Part shipment.

(2) In these cases the exporters will be required to apply to ADs in the form given in
Appendix-16. The Form TM in these cases shall be approved by the concerned ADs.
Genuineness of the claim should in these cases be established by examination of the following
documents:
(a) Short-weight claim
(i) Proceeds Realization Certificate (PRC);
(ii) Debit Note from the buyer;
(iii) Weighment Certificate/Note from a recognised weighing body;
(iv) LMD Certificate (for shipping weight basis shipment) in the case of raw jute.

(b) Quality claim
(i) PRC;
(ii) Debit Note from the buyer;
(iii) Test Report from a recognized test house or an Arbitration Certificate from an approved
body of arbitrators.

(c) Part shipment
(i) PRC;
(ii) Debit Note from the buyer;
(iii) Contract in original;
(iv) Arbitration award from a recognized arbitrator as referred to in the contract.

73. In the following cases, ADs may effect remittances in settlement of commercial claims
in respect of exports without prior approval of Bangladesh Bank

(1) Claims on export of jute goods by mills controlled by the Bangladesh Jute Mills
Corporation (BJMC) provided:
(a) The remittance application of the mill concerned is supported by a genuineness certificate
about the claims issued by the BJMC.
(b) The proceeds realization certificate is submitted alongwith the application.

(2) While receiving application from the exporter for approval of remittance on account of
quality claim against export of raw jute and jute goods, No Objection Certificate/

--- Page 56 ---
50

recommendation issued by the Directorate of Inspection of Jute and Jute goods should be asked
for alongwith other prescribed documents. No remittance application against quality claim on
export of raw jute and jute goods should be considered without this No Objection Certificate/
recommendation. The authorization of export claims is applicable for export of goods on sales
contracts under open account credit terms.

74. Reporting

ADs will submit to FEOD, Head office or other offices of Bangladesh Bank all the documents
under various types of export claims as mentioned in paragraphs 72 &73 above for post facto
examination, within 15 days from the date of remittance.

75. Required documents

Applications (Appendix-16) from exporters for export claim remittance of more than 10 (ten)
percent of repatriated export proceeds, supported by documents mentioned in paragraph 72
above, should be forwarded to Bangladesh Bank alongwith Form TM for prior approval. Such
applications for remittance against other types of claim settlements on exports should also be
forwarded similarly to Bangladesh Bank for prior approval, duly supported by the relevant
documents as listed below:

(1) Amicable Settlement
(a) PRC.
(b) Debit Note from the buyer.
(c) Certificate from the Chamber of Commerce in the country of import.
(d) Correspondence in original exchanged between the shipper and the buyer. Original cables
should be produced if cable charges are included in the Debit Note.

(2) Commission
(a) PRC.
(b) Debit Note.
(c) Agreement regarding the payment of commission.

(3) Cancellation of the contract
(a) Debit Note.
(b) Contract.
(c) Correspondence in original passed between buyer and shipper
(d) Arbitration Certificate, or Chamber of Commerce's Certificate for claims settled amicably.

(4) Freight against exports
(a) PRC.
(b) Debit Note.
(c) Contract.
(d) Bill of Lading.

--- Page 57 ---
51


(5) Inspection fee, arbitration fee, survey and analysis fee etc.
(a) PRC.
(b) Debit Note from the institution claiming fees.
(c) Report from the above institution in support of the claim.

(6) Miscellaneous claims like refund of export duty
(a) PRC
(b) Debit Note.
(c) Contract.
(d) Correspondence.

76. In addition to the export claims mentioned above, remittance on account of the
undermentioned claims in respect of raw jute are also allowed subject to fulfillment of
documentation prescribed for each type of claims.

(1) Invoice back and resale
Remittance is allowed after resale of the goods is completed. Resale price is adjusted from
invoiced back claim.
(a) Original arbitration award (including appeal award, if any).
(b) Documentary evidence to show that:
(i) Shipper had advised the Bangladesh Bank about buyer's exercising the option of invoicing
back the parcel.
(ii) Prior permission from Bangladesh Bank was obtained for resale of the invoiced back
goods.

(c) Receipts, bills, vouchers etc. in support of miscellaneous charges included in the claim.
(d) Account sale or resale note.
(e) Resale Contract [(For resale, maximum commission is 1(one) percent and no commission is
allowed if the goods are resold to the same party who has invoiced back the parcel)].

(2) Default
(a) Original Contract.
(b) Correspondence in original exchanged between the shipper and the buyer regarding non-
shipment.
(c) Original arbitration award or amicable settlement certificate.
(d) Documentary evidence in support of market difference of claims.
(e) Shipper's explanation for non-fulfillment of the contract.

(3) Moisture claim
(a) PRC
(b) Debit Note.
(c) Original contract.
(d) Original arbitration award or test report or analysis report.

--- Page 58 ---
52


(4) Late shipment penalty
(a) Original contract.
(b) Copy of bill of lading.
(c) Shipper's explanation showing reasons for late shipment.
(d) BJA's letter declining to issue unavoidable delay certificate.

(5) Difference for payment received at sight instead of after sight (usance) basis
(a) Original contract.
(b) Correspondence showing at whose instance the payment was made at sight.
(c) Banker's confirmation that the proceeds were realized at sight showing the date of
realization and particulars of returns in which the transaction was reported.
(d) The basis on which the difference is claimed and evidence in support thereof.

(6) Freight rebate (or difference in rebate)
(a) Original Contract.
(b) Copy of Bill of Lading.
(c) Shipping company's certificate of payment (if freight paid abroad and rebate paid in
Bangladesh).

(7) Refund against overpricing
(a) Original contract.
(b) Correspondence exchanged between buyer and seller in this regard.

77. Other type of export claims not covered above, the exporter's application should be
forwarded by ADs to Bangladesh Bank with full information and supporting documents.

ADs should make online (OEMS) monthly reporting of export claim remittances, mentioning
remittances allowed by themselves during a month under general authority given to them as
well as those allowed with prior Bangladesh Bank approval, by the 10th day of following
month at the close of relevant month.

78. Claim settlement under marine insurance policies

For remittances on account of settlement of claims arising under Marine Insurance Policies,
ADs are required to submit the following documents to the Bangladesh Bank with Form TM
duly filled in alongwith a declaration as per Appendix-11 for approval:

(1) Marine Policies
(a) Shippers' invoices relating to shipment against which claim is made.
(b) PRC
(c) Bill of lading.
(d) Claim Note.
(e) Original Insurance Policy/Certificate.

--- Page 59 ---
53

(f) Survey Report.
(g) Short Contents Certificate from the Customs Authorities of the country of import in case
claim is made for short delivery of goods.

--- Page 60 ---
54

Part-G
INSURANCE BUSINESS


79. General

Foreign exchange regulations governing insurance business entered into and completed in
Bangladesh are set out in this chapter. Branches and agencies in Bangladesh of insurance
companies whose head offices are situated abroad are, from foreign exchange regulations
viewpoint, regarded as resident in Bangladesh and are subject to the-same instructions as
insurance companies registered in Bangladesh.

80. Life insurance

(1) Types of policies which may be issued:
(a) Insurance policies on the lives of residents of Bangladesh may be issued only in Taka.
(b) Existing Taka life policies may not be converted into foreign currency policies except with
the prior approval of Bangladesh Bank. Similarly, the records of an existing Taka policy may
not be transferred to an office outside Bangladesh.

(2) Collection of premia:
(a) Premia on Taka policies on the lives of non-residents may be accepted in Taka if made by
cheques drawn on a non-resident Taka account with an AD or if made out of funds remitted
from abroad by the policy-holder through an AD.
(b) Premia collected on Taka policies must be credited to the insurance company's resident
account. The remittance of such collections by the branches of non-resident companies to their
overseas head office or branches is not permitted.

(3) Assignments: Policies may not be assigned by a resident in Bangladesh to a non-resident or
by one non-resident to another non-resident in a different country without the prior approval of
Bangladesh Bank. There is, however, no objection to technical assignments of life policies to
the head offices of overseas insurance companies as security for Taka loans granted by the
branch in Bangladesh.

81. Payments of claims

(1) The maturity proceeds or surrender value of Taka policies will be paid in Taka only.

(2) The proceeds at maturity of Taka endowment policies or annuities held by foreign nationals
who are temporarily resident in Bangladesh or who having been temporarily resident in
Bangladesh have left Bangladesh, may not be transferred for payment outside Bangladesh
without the prior approval of Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 61 ---
55

82. The foreign currency policy abroad

(1) Bangladeshi nationals may buy life insurance policies in foreign exchange while residing
abroad. On their permanent return to Bangladesh, they may continue to pay the premia from
FC accounts maintained in Bangladesh. Remittance facility may also be allowed for premia
payments provided:
(a) The foreign currency policy abroad was taken while the policy- holder was resident abroad;
(b) Nominee or assignee of the policy is a resident;
(c) The holder furnishes undertaking that the proceeds of the policy will be received in
Bangladesh through normal banking channel;
(d) Declaration is furnished by the applicant as per proforma at Appendix-17;
(e) ADs shall keep note of maturity date of the policy and inform Bangladesh Bank about non-
repatriation of proceeds of the policy at maturity immediately in any such case.

83. Export of policies

Life and endowment policies which fall within the definition of securities cannot be taken or
sent out of Bangladesh without the prior approval of Bangladesh Bank. Applications for export
of life policies should be made to Bangladesh Bank giving full description of the policy and
reasons for its export.

84. Non-life business

(1) Marine policies-exports

Exporters in Bangladesh may obtain insurance cover for shipments on CIF basis; the policies
may be expressed in Taka or in foreign currency. For FOB/CFR export shipments, the
insurance covers are arranged by the overseas buyers.

(2) Marine policies-imports:
(a) Exports from and imports into Bangladesh under the public sector are required
compulsorily to be insured with the Sadharan Bima Corporation (SBC). Private sector
exporters and importers may take out policies from SBC or from any approved private sector
insurance company in Bangladesh.
(b) The insurance policies on account of imports into Bangladesh should be expressed in Taka
except that in case of imports for projects/industries which are financed by foreign
loans/grants, policies may be expressed in foreign currency if the terms of the loans/grants so
require.
(c) Marine policies-coastal shipments

Coastal shipments between places in Bangladesh may be insured only in Taka.

--- Page 62 ---
56

85 (1) Insurance cover on non-marine risks (excluding life) inside Bangladesh may be issued
only in Taka. Nothing in this paragraph shall affect the operation of the warehouse to
warehouse clause in marine insurance policies.

(2) Insurance cover on assets outside Bangladesh owned by residents of Bangladesh may be
issued in Taka or in the currency of the country in which the assets are situated.

(3) Insurance of baggage and valuables in transit

Insurance of baggage and valuables in transit is subject to the same regulations as applicable to
marine insurance policies.

86 (1) Currency in which policies may be issued for non-marine risks (excluding life) : Claims
on foreign currency policies may be paid to non- resident beneficiaries in the currency in
which the policy is issued. Where a remittance from Bangladesh is required for this purpose,
an application must be made to the Bangladesh Bank on Form TM accompanied by a
declaration as per Appendix-11.

(2) Currency in which policies may be issued-other risks : Claims on foreign currency policies
whose beneficiaries are residents of Bangladesh may ordinarily be paid in Taka. Where the
beneficiary requires payment in the currency of the policy, permission from Bangladesh Bank
should be applied for on Form TM accompanied by declaration as per Appendix11. The
beneficiary must explain in the declaration why payment in foreign currency is required.

(3) All risks insurance: All risks insurance policies on the assets of residents may be issued
only in Taka.

(4) Householders policies: Householders policies can be issued only in Taka.

(5) Personal accident insurance policies: The issue of personal accident policies is subject to
the same conditions as life policies.

(6) Policies under the Workmen's Compensation Act and Merchant Shipping Act : Policies
under the Workmen's Compensation Act and Merchant Shipping Act can be issued only in
Taka.

87 (1) Method of collection of premia on (non-life business) Taka policies : Premia on Taka
policies of non-residents may be accepted in Taka if made by cheque drawn by the non-
resident policy holder on his non-resident Taka account with an AD or if the payment is
remitted from abroad by the policy holder through an AD. Insurer should not accept payment
in Taka from resident accounts in such cases.

(2) Premia collection: Premia on foreign currency policies issued by the Insurance Companies
in respect of foreign nationals resident in Bangladesh can be collected out of remittable Taka

--- Page 63 ---
57

funds of the policy holder or through a remittance received from abroad. In respect of foreigner
residing abroad the premia can be collected only through remittance from abroad.

88. Method of settlement of claim (non-life business)

Claims against Taka policies can be paid in Taka only, regardless of whether the beneficiary is
a resident or otherwise.

--- Page 64 ---
58

Part-H
REINSURANCE

89. General

Remittance facilities for reinsurance (non-life) abroad will be allowed to the insurance
companies operating in Bangladesh by ADs without prior Bangladesh Bank approval subject to
the following conditions:

(1) Remittances of Premia-Facultative Reinsurance:
(a) Application for this purpose should be made on Form TM accompanied by a declaration in
the form given in Appendix-18.
(b) The application is supported by evidence in the nature of cover note etc., in respect of
reinsurance effected.
(c) In case of applicant insurance companies other than the SBC, a certificate from SBC that
the applicant has fulfilled the requirement of obtaining reinsurance cover through SBC to the
extent statutorily prescribed.

(2) Settlement of Account- Treaty Reinsurance:
(a) The application is supported by a proforma statement of account signed by the Manager of
the applicant company or an officer holding a power of attorney and duly confirmed by the
reinsurer.
(b) The applicant company has submitted quarterly statements of its reinsurance account to
FEOD, Head office or other offices of Bangladesh Bank through ADs.
(c) Proceeds certificate in case any amount of claim has been received in cash and the same is
being accounted for through the statement of account.
(d) Applications for this purpose should be made on Form TM accompanied by a declaration in
the form in Appendix-19.

90. Reinsurance-life: remittance of premia

Remittance of premia towards reinsurance of life business done by an insurance company in
Bangladesh under treaty arrangement with foreign reinsurers may be allowed by ADs on
application in Form TM alongwith declaration as per Appendix-19 subject to:

(1) Submission of Bordereaux.
(2) Furnishing of undertaking by the insurance company to repatriate receipts in settlement of
claims under the reinsurance through an AD.
(3) A proforma statement of account signed by the authorized official of the insurance
company.

--- Page 65 ---
59

Part-I
PAYMENT THROUGH INTERNATIONAL CARDS

91. International cards

Payment in foreign exchange may be made through international card (debit/credit/prepaid as
the case may be) of internationally recognized issuing company as per the framework of this
part.

92. Instructions relating to issuance of international cards

(1) International credit/debit/prepaid card against balances held in ERQ accounts:

International credit/debit/prepaid cards may be issued against the balances held in the ERQ
account as per entitlement. International cards may be issued in favor of upto three (3) top level
executives of an exporting firm/organization holding ERQ accounts. An exporting
firm/organization may avail of the card facility from one card issuing bank only. It will be upto
the card issuing bank to accept or decline a request from an ERQ account holding exporting
firm/organization for issuance of international cards. Cards issued against ERQ accounts may
be used only for meeting the bonafide business purposes of the exporting firm/organization.

(2) International debit/prepaid card against balances held in FC accounts of enterprises
operating in specialized zones

To facilitate business travel abroad by officials of enterprises located in EPZs/EZs, balances of
FC accounts may be used through international debit/prepaid cards also. International cards
(debit/prepaid) may be issued in favor of upto three (3) top level executives of concerned
enterprise against balances held in such FC accounts. An enterprise may avail of the card
facility from one card issuing bank only.

(3) International credit/prepaid/debit card against travel quota entitlement

ADs may issue international credit/prepaid/debit card against the annual personal travel quota
entitlements of the prospective card holders as per paragraph 9 of this circular. While issuing
card, ADs shall endorse on the passport, the value for which the card is issued. The same shall
be reported to 'Online Foreign Exchange Transactions Monitoring System' of Bangladesh Bank
as mentioned in paragraph 9(8)(c) of this circular. In case of issuance of international debit
card, ADs shall observe the following instructions:
(a) ADs shall have suitable arrangement in the local currency accounts to which international
debit cards are linked so as to be ensured that amount in foreign exchange cannot be expensed
in excess of endorsement within the annual travel entitlement;
(b) The local currency accounts to which international debit cards are linked shall have
sufficient fund to support the expenses to be met from the cards. Alternatively, ADs should
retain endorsed amount equivalent in Taka from local currency accounts in the margin

--- Page 66 ---
60

accounts to be maintained in the names of customers for smooth adjustment of the expenses
incurred through international debit cards;
(c) ADs shall satisfy themselves that international debit cards under this authorization and
prevailing international credit/prepaid cards shall be mutually exclusive.

(4) International credit/debit/prepaid card against balances held in RFCD accounts

International credit/debit/prepaid card may be issued against the balances held in RFCD
accounts opened and maintained by ADs in Bangladesh as per section III, chapter 13 of GFET
and FE Circular Letter No. 19, dated December 03, 2023 and FE Circular Letter No. 05, dated
May 09, 2024.

(5) International prepaid card against Hajj entitlement for private sector Hajj agencies (Ref.
paragraph 18 of this circular)

In each year government declares general permission for releasing foreign exchange favoring
private sector Hajj agencies to meet food, lodging etc. expenses of the pilgrims in Saudi Arabia
against foreign exchange entitlement fixed for each individual. Foreign exchange within the
approved limit under general authorization may be issued in favor of approved private sector
Hajj agencies operating in Bangladesh by ADs in the form of prepaid card besides cash/wire
transfer under the following arrangements:
(a) Hajj prepaid card as issued within the said entitlement fixed by the Government for the
respective year shall be used in Saudi Arabia only. Unused balance (if any) shall be encashed
into Taka after return to Bangladesh and the card will be invalidated;
(b) ADs shall have to be satisfied that endorsement of the same entitlement has not already
been made/will not be made on the pilgrim pass/passport by another AD. While issuing the
card, ADs shall endorse an amount not exceeding Hajj entitlement (as fixed by the
Government) on the pilgrim pass/passport.

(6) International prepaid card against Hajj entitlement for individuals (Ref. paragraph 18 of this
circular)

International prepaid card may be issued to intending pilgrims (individual resident Bangladeshi
nationals) for meeting expenses in Saudi Arabia while performing Hajj as per entitlement
declared by the Government in each year for using in Saudi Arabia only. While issuing the
card, ADs shall endorse an amount not exceeding Hajj entitlement (as fixed by the
Government) on the passport/pilgrim pass. Hajj prepaid card as issued within the said
entitlement fixed by the Government for the respective year shall be used in Saudi Arabia only.
Unused balance (if any) shall be encashed into Taka after return to Bangladesh and the card
will be invalidated.

(7) International credit/prepaid card against govt. officials etc. (Ref. paragraph 11 of this
circular)

--- Page 67 ---
61

International credit/prepaid card may be issued favoring officials of government/autonomous/
semi-autonomous institutions etc. for official/ semi official visits abroad against foreign
exchange entitlement fixed by the Ministry of Finance/competent authority from time to time.
In such case, the prospective card holder shall be required to submit the letter of sanction for
limit of foreign exchange and the competent authority's order authorizing the travel. While
issuing the card, ADs shall ensure that the amount does not exceed the entitlement (as fixed by
the government/competent authority).

(8) International credit/prepaid card for private sector officials

International credit/prepaid card may be issued favoring private sector participants for
attending seminars, conferences, workshops, training etc. abroad arranged by recognized
international bodies as per entitlement mentioned in paragraph 12 of this circular. While
issuing the card, ADs shall endorse an amount not exceeding the entitlement as stated in the
above mentioned paragraph on the passport.

(9) International credit/prepaid card for business travel quota entitlements for exporters,
manufacturers for domestic markets, importers and local agents operating in Bangladesh on
behalf of foreign principals

International credit/ prepaid card may be issued favoring exporters, importers, producers for
the local market and local agents operating in Bangladesh on behalf of foreign principals as per
entitlement mentioned in paragraph 15 of this circular. While issuing the card, ADs shall
endorse an amount not exceeding the entitlement as stated in the above paragraph on the
passport.

(10) International debit/prepaid card against private FC accounts

International debit/prepaid card may be issued against the balances held in private FC accounts
as per section I, chapter 13 of GFET.

(11) International credit/prepaid cards for BASIS member IT/software firms

Within the total limit of USD 40,000 per calendar year, (as mentioned in paragraph 63) ADs
may issue international credit/prepaid card favoring a nominated official of IT/software firm
for up to the limit of USD 8,000 with the recommendation of BASIS. The card may be refilled
for another USD 8,000 subject to production of documents evidencing the fact that the
previous transactions were carried out for the purposes mentioned in paragraph 63 of this
circular. ADs shall ensure that the aggregate amount of refills of international card and outward
payment through other means do not exceed USD 40,000 in a calendar year as stated in the
said paragraph.

(12) ADs may issue refillable international credit/prepaid card with USD 2,000 to the
nominated official of a member firm of e-Commerce Association of Bangladesh (e-CAB) for

--- Page 68 ---
62

meeting bonafide current expenses abroad as per paragraph 64 of this circular. Aggregate
refills in cards and remittances by banking channel shall not exceed total limit of USD 10,000
in a calendar year.

(13) International cards for online payment of membership fees, etc.

International cards may be used for online payment through internet of membership fees of
foreign professional and scientific institutions, both for individual and corporate in Bangladesh,
fees for application, registration, admission, examination (TOEFL, SAT etc.) in connection
with admission into foreign educational institutions as mentioned in paragraph 28 & 62 of this
circular. Individuals not holding international cards in their names may also make such online
payment through internet using 'virtual card' for the required amount by international card
issuing banks, for use through designated bank branches.

(14) Virtual (debit/credit/prepaid) card for IT expenses

International card issuing banks have been allowed to issue 'Virtual Card' to individual
developers/freelancers of mobile Apps and Games having acknowledgements /training/
Bootcamps/hackathons/course participation certificates on mobile application development,
maximum USD 500 in a calendar year as mentioned in paragraph 38 of this circular.

(15) International cards/virtual cards for visa processing fees

Remittance on account of visa processing may be made through online using international
cards (debit/prepaid) as mentioned in paragraph 32 & 33 (visa processing), international cards
issuing banks may also issue Virtual Cards for individuals not holding international cards to
facilitate the online payment of visa processing fees. In addition, ADs may issue international
cards (debit/prepaid) in the name of official designated by nominated agents to facilitate the
transactions as per paragraph 31(2) of this circular.

(16) International cards to individual developers/freelancers (Ref. paragraph 57 of FE Circular
No. 31, dated July 31, 2025)

ADs may issue international cards to individual developers/freelancers to credit their proceeds
received from abroad against IT enabled services provided by them.

(17) Online hotel booking using international cards on internet

International cards issued under different entitlements as mentioned in paragraph 91 of this part
may also be used for online hotel booking by the cardholders in case of travel abroad.

--- Page 69 ---
63

(18) Use of international cards for online payment

ADs may allow their cardholder customers to use international card for online payment not
exceeding USD 300 or its equivalent at a single transaction against legitimate purchase of
items of goods and services (such as downloadable application software, e-books, etc.),
magazine/newspaper subscription fees from reputed and reliable sources abroad. Online
payments for such purchases shall be limited to the available unused annual travel quotas of the
international card holders plus an additional amount not exceeding USD 1000 annually. It will
be the responsibility of the international card holders using the online purchase option to fulfill
tax/duty payment obligations, if any; they should also undertake such transactions with due
caution against risks being defrauded by unreliable unscrupulous vendors.

(19) Payment of mobile phone roaming bill

Subject to entitlement in each of the categories mentioned above, international card holder may
pay their mobile phone roaming service utilization bill to mobile phone operators in
Bangladesh through international card. For realization of roaming bills, the mobile phone
operators are advised to specify the followings in their bills:
(a) name of the country;
(b) amount of security deposit of the customer (if any, specifying area and country as above)

(20) In case of requirement for online payments against webinar services, ADs may issue
virtual card or one time card in the name of the nominated official of the applicant entities,
subject to compliance of paragraph 66 of this circular.

(21) International debit/prepaid/credit card may be issued for payments toward registration fee
for medical check-up services of Bangladeshi nationals proceeding abroad as per paragraph 57
of this circular.

(22) International cards (debit/credit/prepaid) may be used for online purchase of air/ship
tickets for travelling abroad by foreign nationals on e-commerce website accessible through
internet. To facilitate the transactions, ADs may, under merchant arrangement, provide
acquiring services to airlines/shipping lines/general sales agent/travel agents to realize the sales
proceeds in foreign currency.

93. Use of international cards for travels outside Bangladesh

(1) International cards are, in general, intended to be used by Bangladeshi cardholders while on
travel abroad. General permission is, however, given to use international cards in Bangladesh
for online payments as specified in the above stated paragraphs. International cards are useable
for online purchase of air tickets by cardholders while on travel between destinations outside
Bangladesh (such as New York to Philadelphia or Singapore to Kuala Lumpur or like). But
online purchase of air tickets for such destinations through international cards cannot be used
by travelers before proceeding abroad.

--- Page 70 ---
64


(2) International cards may be used for online purchase of air tickets by cardholders having
visa, where applicable, for travels of such destinations outside Bangladesh. Bangladeshi travel
operators may also provide such ticketing services to travelers for movements between
destinations outside Bangladesh against payments by international cards. In this context, ADs
shall, under merchant agreements, provide acquiring services to travel operators in Bangladesh
for capturing online payments settled through international cards against sales of air tickets for
above stated travels. Travel operators shall, having relevant registrations/permissions/licenses
including membership with trade association representing the sector, have tie-up arrangements
with internationally recognized travel operators/airlines. Acquiring services by ADs may also
be applicable for capturing payments against such sales to foreign nationals/non-residents
residing abroad or in Bangladesh. The payments so captured by ADs shall be retained in
margin accounts of travel operators. Utilization of balances retained in margin accounts shall
be guided by the following instructions:
(a) Periodical remittances to counterparts abroad, net of agreed upon reasonable service
charges/ commissions;
(b) Refund to travelers in case of cancellation of travel;
(c) Encashment of service charges/commissions;
(d) Deduction and payment of applicable taxes thereon.

(3) Remittance requests by travel operators to ADs shall be supported by invoices and
statements stating sales of air tickets, cancellation of travels, utilization of air tickets, payment
of applicable taxes, if any, etc., and reconciliation thereof to arrive at payable amount. ADs
shall preserve documents for 5 years for onsite inspection by Bangladesh Bank.

(4) Subject to observance of the above instructions, hotel booking and purchase of railway/
ship/bus tickets for travel between destinations outside Bangladesh may be arranged by travel
operators for which ADs may provide services of receiving payment in margin accounts and
settling dues payable to counterparts abroad.

(5) ADs shall adhere to KYC and AML/CFT standards with regards to the transactions.

(6) Tour operators desirous to provide the services shall, through their ADs, intimate to
Foreign Exchange Policy Department at Bangladesh Bank, Head office of their agreements/
arrangements with international travel operators made in line with this circular before one
month of commencing business.

94. Other instructions

The following requisites, instructions etc. shall have to be meticulously complied with while
issuing such international cards:

(1) ADs shall take necessary arrangements to guard against illegitimate online payments
abroad through international cards from Bangladesh like payments for participating in online

--- Page 71 ---
65

casino/gambling, trading in forex/stock exchanges, purchase of crypto currencies/lottery ticket,
purchase of goods/services originated in Bangladesh, etc.

(2) ADs shall strictly observe KYC and AML/CFT standards, follow usual reporting routine to
Bangladesh Bank, and ensure compliance of regulations concerning duties/taxes applicable
against the transactions.

(3) A declaration from the intending card holder stating that he is not availing himself of any
international credit/debit/prepaid card from any other AD against the same account or the same
entitlement;

(4) In case the card is issued by a bank against any ERQ/RFCD/FC account maintained in
another bank, an authorization has to be obtained from the prospective card holder allowing the
card issuing bank to have lien and debit authority for the said account from the bank
maintaining that account;

(5) Effective control system must be ensured by the issuing bank to guard against unwanted
drawings in excess of the entitlement or balance in the respective FC accounts (as the case may
be). To facilitate monitoring towards limiting the liabilities on account of card use, the FC
account holding ADs may from time to time advise the card issuing bank about the credit
balances of the FC account;

(6) The cards shall have to be withheld/invalidated as soon as the fund available in the
ERQ/RFCD/FC account is fully utilized/exhausted unless there is reasonable prospect of
replenishment;

(7) In cases of issuances of international cards against ERQ/RFCD/FC accounts, the amount of
the respective card shall be under lien so that under no circumstances related account is
overdrawn. Yet for any unforeseen reason, if any account becomes overdrawn at any point of
time, the same shall have to be immediately reported to the Bangladesh Bank clarifying the
reason and remedial measure thereof;

(8) All records, documents, account statements relating to issuance and use of cards should be
kept ready and available for inspection /examination by Bangladesh Bank as and when
required.

95. Reporting

(1) Head Office/Principal Office of ADs are required to submit monthly statement of
international card to FEOD Head office, Bangladesh Bank as per format given in Appendix-20.

(2) Online reporting: Information regarding issuance of international cards utilization thereof is
required to be reported to 'Online International Card Monitoring System' of Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 72 ---
66

Part J
USE OF CARD PLATFORMS AS PAYMENT CHANNEL

96. Permissible outward remittances through card platform

ADs may use card platforms as alternative to traditional banking channel to effect outward
remittances on behalf of customers for permissible payments as stated below:

(1) Remittance for IT expenses as per paragraph 38 of this circular for non-cardholder
individuals;

(2) Membership fees, fees for application, registration, admission, examination, etc. as per
paragraph 28 of this circular for non-cardholder individuals;

(3) Release of foreign exchange for study abroad as per paragraph 29 of this circular;

(4) Remittance of visa fees abroad as per paragraph 32 of this circular for non-cardholder
individuals;

(5) Remittance of immigration visa processing fees, evaluation fees, right of landing fees as per
paragraph 33 of this circular;

(6) Registration/participation fee for attending training, seminar, workshop abroad as per
paragraph 36 of this circular;

(7) Remittance for academic/research journal subscription as per paragraph 56 of this circular;

(8) Remittance towards publication related fees of articles in international journals as per
paragraph 37 of this circular;

(9) Release of foreign exchange for travel on health ground as per paragraph 10 of this circular,
provided that total release through cash and international cards shall not exceed permissible
limit;

(10) Remittance on account of tour operators out of balances held in FC accounts as per
paragraph 22 (f), chapter 12 of GFET;

(11) Periodical remittances to counterparts abroad by travel operators as per paragraph 93 of
this circular

(12) Remittance against collection of proceeds against air ticket sales for journey outside
Bangladesh as per paragraph 92 of this circular;

--- Page 73 ---
67

(13) Remittances on account of actual payments against relevant invoices of webinar solution
services as per paragraph 66 of this circular;

(14) Remittance on account of correspondence courses as per paragraph 30 of this circular.

97. Observances by ADs

(1) ADs shall have underlying arrangements with respective platforms through which
payments by cards are executed.

(2) ADs shall ensure compliance of due diligence procedure regarding risk mitigation and
transactional settlement.

(3) ADs shall be ensured that transaction requests from individual customers having proper
documentation including Form TM shall not be executable through traditional banking
channel; and

(4) While executing remittance through card platforms, ADs shall apply spot selling rate (TT
Clean) as exchange rate, applicable for service payments.

(5) ADs shall comply with regulatory instructions contained in this circular applicable for the
particular transactions, including reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 74 ---
Paragraph 2 (1)
Appendix-1

--- Page 75 ---
Page 2
Paragraph 2 (1)
Appendix-1
45 (forty five)

--- Page 76 ---
Page 3
Paragraph 2 (1)
Appendix-1

--- Page 77 ---
Paragraph 8 (1)
Appendix-2

--- Page 78 ---
Paragraph 8 (1)
Appendix-2

--- Page 79 ---
Appendix-3
Paragraph 10 (1)

--- Page 80 ---
Appendix-3
Paragraph 10 (1)

--- Page 81 ---
Appendix-4
Paragraph 22 (1)

--- Page 82 ---
Appendix-4
Paragraph 22 (1)
Page 2

--- Page 83 ---
Appendix-4
Paragraph 22 (1)
Page 3

--- Page 84 ---
Appendix-5
Paragraph 27 (1)

--- Page 85 ---
Appendix-5
Paragraph 27 (1)

--- Page 86 ---
Appendix-5
Paragraph 27 (1)

--- Page 87 ---
Appendix-5
Paragraph 27 (1)

--- Page 88 ---
Appendix-5
Paragraph 27 (1)

--- Page 89 ---
Appendix-6
Paragraph 29(1)(a)(i)

--- Page 90 ---
Appendix-6
Paragraph 29(1)(a)(i)

--- Page 91 ---
Appendix-6
Paragraph 29(1)(a)(i)

--- Page 92 ---
Appendix-7
Paragraph 30 (1) (a)

--- Page 93 ---
Appendix-8
Paragraph 39

--- Page 94 ---
Appendix 8
Paragraph 44 (1)
Appendix-9

--- Page 95 ---
Appendix-9
Paragraph 44 (1)

--- Page 96 ---
Appendix-10
Paragraph 51 (1)
PARTICULARS OF FOREIGN BRANCH OFFICE OPENED BY A
COMPANY/FIRM RESIDENT IN BANGLADESH

--- Page 97 ---
Appendix-11
Paragraph 60 (1) (g)

--- Page 98 ---
Appendix-12
Paragraph 65 (1) (b)

--- Page 99 ---
Appendix-13
Paragraph 65 (2),(3)

--- Page 100 ---
Appendix-13
Paragraph 65 (2),(3)

--- Page 101 ---
Appendix-14
Paragraph 65 (3)

--- Page 102 ---
Appendix-15
Paragraph 69 (1) (f)

--- Page 103 ---
Appendix-16
Paragraph 72 (2)

--- Page 104 ---
Appendix-17
Paragraph 82 (1) (d)

--- Page 105 ---
Appendix-18
Paragraph 89 (1) (a)

--- Page 106 ---
Appendix-19
Paragraph 89 (2) (d)

--- Page 107 ---
Paragraph 95 (1)
Appendix-20

--- Page 108 ---
m&Wx&*-)
*qtfu
FFr
<n<T
ctq
Tq{n-fi
q-{{wffi
Af
Eqq144qq6q1E"'
<Rqrffi*r
s,h-
crffit
silffi,,.
FPtm+fE.q+tFis
q&ft6x*Bl
'iffiq,
$f a.",
{ot}
Bangladesh
Investment
Development
Authority
Prime
Min ister's
Office
Circular
Date:
03 March,2021
Suhject
nes
{br
nce
Renat
tof
Rovaltv.
Technical
Knorvledee/Technical
Know-how
Fee(s).
Tebhnical
Assistance
Feejs).
and
Franchise
Fee(s)-2020.
No.
03.08.2680.224.165.1479.2017l59-This
Guidelines
is issued
in
pursuance
of Section
18
of the
'Bangladesh
Investment
Development
Authority
Act 2016';'Foreign
Exchange
Regulation
Act
1947'
amended
in 2015;
and
related
instructions
described
in the
'Guidelines
for
Foreigrr
Exchange
Transactions
2018'
(read
with
subsequent
amendments)
of Bangladesh
Bank
along
with Foreign
Exchange
(FE)
circular
No. 42 Dated
November
29,2017
of
Bangladesh
Bank
in
order
to
serye the purpose
of clarifuing processes
and
procedures
for outward
remittance
repatriation
for payment
of royalty,
technical
knowledge/technical
know-how
fee(s),
technical
assistance
fee(s),
and franchise
fee(s)
by
private
industrial
enterprises
registered
in
Bangladesh (with
'Registrar
of Joint
Stock
companies
and
Firms'
as well
as with
BIDA)
and
as
defined
in
Section
15(3)
of the
Bangladesh
investment
Development
Authority
Act2016.
vso:
qf
BRT
lv.oo
Enclosure-A

--- Page 109 ---
gbol
ft4cq-f
crrrqB,
qfuRs.:'tf
to,
l.oQ.)
enterprises.
so
described,
shall
folroi.v
rire
processes
a,d
procedures
described
in
this
GLridelines
for
patiir.-'itt
oi
roy'alty"rfl:lrf:':
^nd
trerlnnrqe
Prvrruu'lJ
"nrr'-ltnrv
and
lrarlchise
iechnical
knowledgeltechnicai
know-1-lor,v
or
technical
assistanc,
fee(s)toforeigncollabcrator/orgarrization/conrpanyinaccordanceu,ithtire
definitions
and
uranuers
as
foliows'
1.0
Dcfinitions
Authorized
Dealer
(AD)
llank
Atr.Authorizedl)ealer.bankistlrebr"irncllies)ofschcdLrlccl}..ani'i:,
Bangiadesh
lhat
has
received
autilol'izattull
i-iJln
the
i3;ilrgiadesh
Eank
to
ac1
as
dealer
involvecl
in
tracling
of
foreigir
curreilcies
tbi
specified
pllrposes'
Advance
Fee(s)
Advance
Fee(s).
for
tl-ris
Gr.ridelines,
ma\'
Inea'l
the
atnolttrt
of
money
paid
in
adr,aflce
(in
parl
oL
in
tull
against
the
appropriale
invcices)
against
the
agreedu.,,,i.",explectedtobedelir,eredit.tthetnatrtrer.oiteclrrrical
assistancc.
tecirnical
kno\r,leclge/kuol.r'-hou,"
i'ol'altv
and/i;l'l'rancltisee
lee(s)
infavorofacollaboratorColnpanyoritsideBarrgladeslrdirringtlre
irnpiementatio[
stage
of
business
rvirere
cotnurercial
operation
has
irc't
stafted,vetorno.upitulma'ciritterylravescf.ar'beerritriportei"
Affidavit
(for acljustment
of
Advance
P;rvment)
An
Afficlar'it,
in
cotitrectictr
lt,itlt
tlris
Guicielities'
n,ill
be
statctnerit
0f
facts
and
prorrise
made
by
an
applicallt
corlipall)Lrttcier
oath(certified
by
notary
public),
n-learring
tt
r:rake
fonnal
prourise
to
be
used
in
coutl
or
by
another
official
inititution
(sucir
as
bank)
that
confirms
that
the
approvalofadvanceoutwardremiffattccpaltnetrtisreceivedfronrBIDA
tbrthepurposeoftlreconcernedbusittessSetupi]rocessescrnlyarrdtl-re
amountremittedasadvancefee(s)lvilllrebroughtbackfromtlreconcerned
foreigrrcollaboratororrr,illbcdepositedlvitlrforeigncllrrencyequivalent
IlDf
in
their
bank
accoLillt
lrotn
rvhere
the
fund
$'as
irritialil'
parkecl
by
thc
applicarltColnpanyandlvitlrirtthetitnedecidedbl,'BlDAittcasetlrefacts
stated
appearr'ro
false
and/or
t6e
business
does
not
stad
its
cot,tnercial
operatiou
as
cotrm
itted'
Arm's
Length
Transaction
The
ann,s
length
transaction,
also
knorvuas
the
Arm's
Length
Principle
(ALP)inclicate"satransactionbetrveentwoconrpleteiyirrdependentand
rvillingpartiesinrvhiclrl-lothparliesareactingintheirtrrvnself--interest.
such
tiansactiofl
is
basecl
exclusively
on
fair
market
value.

--- Page 110 ---
<i(qrffi.i
(,ltcfi,
qfui-<s,
qrf
qo,
Q.oQ.)
9bo\9
Bank
(luarantee
bank
gllarantee
is a promissorY
note
from
a bank
or
other
lending
institr"rtion
coiifirrning
that if
a parlicular
company
being
party
to
asreement
defaults
on
a coulnitnrent.
the
lrank
r.l,ill
rnake good
of that
cornmitrnent.
In this
case
a letter
olcr"edit
might
not
be
accepted
as a
bank
guarantee.
Bcnefi
ciar-v
0rganization
A legaii'
competent
p;irty
and cor.upan).rcgistered
outside
Bangladesh
wiro
has signed
an a,greelrent
rvith
a colnpanv
re_qistered
in Bangladesh
for
the
pllrpose
of providing
to
the later
various
services
of technical
naftrre
in
erchange
ol agreed
arnount
of
fee(s),
or providing
pennission
to allow
their
brand
namcs
to
be
used
by the
iater
in
exchange
of a
once-only
franchisee
lee(s)
and/or
a royaity
f"ee
for
approved
oeriod. r,,,herever
if
applicable.
BIDA
BIDA
rreans
the Bangladesir
Invcstment
Development
Authority
fbnned
by
the
Bangladesh
lnr,estrnent
i)evelopment
Authority
Act
2016.
Brancl
name
Brand
narne
is
a name given
by
the
producer
corxpanv
and/or
tire maker
to a
prodr"rct
or
range
of
prociLrcts,
especiallv
a trademar.k
for
the
purpose
of
Lrniquely
identifying
tire product
in
the
nrarket.
The
nanre
shall
be
recognized
by the
appropriale
law
ofthe
country.
C&F Value
cost
and
Freigirt (c&F)
is
term
of
sareltrade
signifying
that
the price
invoiceci
or
quoted
by a
selier
for
shipment
does
not
include
insurance
charees,
but
includes
all
expenses
up
to
a consenied
port
ofdestination.
Collaborator
Same
as ilenefi
ciary
Organizatioir.
Contract
For
the purpose
of
this
Guidelines,
contract
r.vill
mean
a negotiated
and
legally
e,forceable
(in
court
of law)
undersianding
and/or
agreement
betw'een
t\\'o
cr
more
ie.eally
competent
parlies
(e.g.,
between
company
re-gistered
in
Bangladesh
and
a company
registered
outsi<ie
of Bangladesh

--- Page 111 ---
9bo8
<REIcq-.f crfrqt,
qfrR@, qd
{oQ.)
in this case)
for
the
payment
of various
fee(s)
(in
accordance with the
section
18
of
BIDA
Act 2016 and associated
orders) to
be
remitted
by the
company
registered in Bangladesh
in favor
of
the later.
The agreement must
be signed and vetted
properly
by the legal representatives
ofthe
parties
of
the agreement
in
due
placg
initialed in
every
page
of the agreement
by
the
signatories, and observing due requirements
of the law
of the country. Any
page
of the
agreement without
the signature
of both the
parties
may not be
considered
as a
legal part
of the agreement.
The agreement must include,
but
not lirnited to,
the
purpose
of
payment
of fee(s),
(ii)
the
scopes
and
justification
of the fees for the benefit
of the
recipient
organization,
(iii)
conditions of the fee(s) becoming payable,
(iv)
amount
and/or calculation
basis of the fee(s),
payment
schedule
of the fee(s),
(vi)
the validity
period
of
the
agreement as well as
(vii)
the activities to be undertaken with
delivery schedule
and acknowledgement
procedure
of the agreed
services.
Copyright
Copyright is a legal
term used to describe the
rights that creators
have over
their literary
and artistic
works
that
provides
exclusive
publication,
distribution, and usage rights
for the creators.
Works covered
by
copyright
range from
books,
music, paintings,
sculpture, and films, to computer
programs,
databases, advertisements,
maps,
and
technical
drawings.
nr. Design
Means
only the features
of shape,
.ponfiguration,
pattern
or ornament
applied to any article
by any value creation
process
or means, whether
manual, mechanical
or
chemical, separate
or combined, which
in the
finished
article appeal
to and are
judged
solely by the eye;
but does not
include any mode
or
principle
of construction
or anything which
is in
substance a
mere mechanical
device, and
does not include any
trade mark
as defined in
section 478,or
property
mark as
defined in section 479
of the
Penal
Code.
Contractor
person
of
firm that undertakes
a contract to
provide
materials or labor
or
to
perform
service or do a
job
which may include
Engineering,
Procurement,
and
Construction
(EPC)
or any other
activities of similar
nature,
The activities
may also include
design,
procurement,
construction,
to commissioning
and handover
of
the
project
to the End-User
or Owner
or
any other
party pertinent.

--- Page 112 ---
<T(ElrqTl
(ri(qb,
sfufts.
Ed
lo, loq)
Fee(s)
Feels),
for the
purpose
of this Guidelines,
will mean
the technical assistance
fee(s), technical
kn*owledge/technical
knorvltou'
fee(s), franchisee
fee(s).
royalty'
lee(s),
and outlet opening
fee(s),
and to be
paidirernitted by
the
appiicant
corrpanv
to the collaborator
company-
outside Bangladesh.
Foreign
Principal
Sa:ne
as Beneficiary
Organization or
Collaborator.
ranchise
A franchise
is a tytpe
of license that
party
(frarichisee)
acquires
to allorv
therrr
tc irave
access to a business's
(fianchisor) proprietary knowledge.
Dioeesses.
arr-v-thing
intangible asset
in nature. and trademarks
in order
to
allor',.
the
partv Ic
sell
product
or
provide a service
Lrnder the business's
ll4lliL.
Franchisee
An individual
or company
that holds a
fi'anchise
fbr
the sale
of
goods
or the
cperation
ofa service
from ihe franchiser.
Franchiser
A company
tl,at
provides
franchise
rights to
tirose rvho want
to
own
fi'anchise.
Franchise Fee(s)
.Franchise
fee(s) is any fee(s) or charge that
a franchisee or sub-franchisor
is
required to
pay'or
agrees to
pay for the right to enter
into a business or
to
continue a business
under a frarrchising
agreement.
lt is an initial
fee(s)
required to
pay
by a
parly
(fi'ancirisee)
to a business's
(the
fianchiser)
for
having access
to it's his brand
name/proprietary knowledge,
processes
and
trademarks
or anything intangibie asset
in nature
in
order
to sell a
product
or
provide
a service
under that business's
name.
Guidelines
Guidelines
means
the
"Guidelines for Outward
Rernittance
Repatriation for
Payment of, Roy'alty,
fechnical knowledge/Technical
know-how
Fee(s),
'I-echnicai
Assistance Fee(s), and Franchise
Fee(s), 2020" as approved
and
ircr-rlated
toy
BillA.
il
9boC
il
ll

--- Page 113 ---
<Rqicrl'(5lr-EB,
trlfufts.
q1f
a.o, Q.o\)
Industrial
Enterprise
Any
or:ivate
indLrstrial
enterprise
in Bangladesh
as
registered
defined
in
Section
i5(3)
of
the
Bangiadesh
Investment
bv BIDA
anC
Developrnent
Authority
Act, 2016.
IntellectualProperty
Iuteliectual
Property (IP)
ref'ers
to creations
of the
mind,
such as
inventiols.
iiterarl'and
efiistic
x,oLks.
desigris.
svrni;ols.
naules
ancr
images,lseci
in
conlmerce.
It
rnight
include.
but
not liinited
to,
copyriglrt,
patents-
tradelrarks.
industrial
designs. geographicaI
indications,
anci
trade
secl.ets
ivhich
should
have
economic
vaiue.
Operatinn
and
Maintenitnce
(O&M)
Fee(s)
T'he
L-l&h4
Fee(s)
is
1,'pe
of pa1'ment
paid
to
coilaboiator
lbr
the
operation
and
maintenance (0&M)
sen,ices.
rlhich
is technical
in
nature
and
associated
rvith
operating
and rnaintaining
cf a
pafiicrilar
process
of rhe
ir-ldLrstrial
endeavor.
Outlet
0pelring
Fee(s)
Fee(s)
charged
by a
franchisor
to
open
a distinguishable
unit
brapch/outlet
of the t}anchise
by
tire franchisee.
Outwand
Remittance
outrvard
rernittauce
means
a remitlance
by
a rernitting
bank,
entrusteci
by
tire remitter
being
an entercrise,
rernit
fbreign
currency
funds
to a
nominated
bank selected
by the
collaborator
in perforrnirlg
any
assigned
activities
to beneficiaries
of
the certain
instrument
and instruct
them
to
pay
ttrre ceftain
amount
to the
nominated payee.
Parent
Companv
parent
company
is a
company
that
owns
enough
voting
stock in
another
firrn
tc
control
nranagerrent
and
operation
bv
inflr"tencing
or
electing
its
board
of directors.
Cornpanies
thal
operate
undei-
this
mauagelnent
are
deemed
subsidiaries
or
associates
of the parent
company.
Patent
patent
is
an exclusive
right granted
for
an
invention,
rvhich
is
product
or
process
that provides,
a new
r'vay
of doing
something,
or
offeres
ne\\,
technical
solution
to
problem.
The
technical
inforn:ation
about
the
invention
must
be
disclosed
to the public
in
patent
application
ancl
must
be
registered
with
the
related
agency
of
the country
concemed.
aa.
bb.

--- Page 114 ---
<i(c[Tl-
ctirqf
..,r.'-ftk'g'.
qF
a.o,
a.oa.]
9bol
cc. Private
Firms
Private
firm means
any industrial enterprises as defined
in
Section
15(3) of
the
Ban
gladesh
Investment Development Autho
rity Act, 20 1 6.
dd. Professional
Valuation
Agency
person or company, who
provides
valuations of
the property and serivce
(lncluding franchisee and related fee(s)) to support
taxation and
other
purposes.
Royaltv
fee(s)
i{o1'alry
rs a fee(s)
paid
by a
locai industrial comparu/ to
the foreign
collaborator
in conslderation of
license tL.
use the forcign mauufacturers'
paterrtr'br:anC nanrelfi-anchise
lor rnarkeiing atid or
producing
the
product(s).
Ro1
alties are
pavments
of varioLrs
t\rpes to olners of
property for use of
thai
prcperty u,hich
usually
deais
ri,itir
payrxent-c
tbr
the richt to rise
intellectLral
propefti,.
like copyrigl"rts.
patents.
and tradernarks the
fee(s)
pa1'able
to
the
roSralt)'rt'ill
col1ply
u'itll
t[e
I'e'lated
pro',isiolts
oi'tiie
Fatents
arrd
Designs Act" 191I
and Trade N4alk Act,2009 oil)angladesh.
Sales
Revenue
Sales
revenue is the
incorne
received by
a company
fi'ont its sales of
goods
or
thc
llror
isiott olserr
ices.
Technical Assistance
specific
non-generic assistance
ri,hich requires definite ski11to complete a
defined task contracted to tl're
industries and/or con:panies by
local
or
international specialists. It cau
take
the
fbrm of sharing information and
erpeftise,
instruction. skill training, transmission of
r'vorking knor'viedge,
facilitating for creaiing specific
task and consulting services.
'fechnical
assistance
fee(s) may include f'ee(s) fbr Engineering, Procurement and
Construction
(EPC),
Operation
and Maintenance
(O&M)
f-ee(s) and any
fec(s) associated in the nature of technical
assistance for rcquiring
project
for
u,hich
tl-re
paymcnt
of
these fee(s) are necessary to
sr"rccessfull
cornpleiion
o1'
I hcsc
proiects.
Tcchnical
knowlege/Technical know'-horv
service
rendered by a foreign collaborator/parertt/group to a business
entiry dr.rly registered rvith BIDA in consideration of specializeC ^rvices
inciuding engineelinu and technical service. assistance ou
rnanufacturing
ff.
50
bb'
hh.

--- Page 115 ---
9bob"
<Tiq]Ihrl
(trfqf
qfukw.
x,tf
qo,
Q.oQ.)
process.
testing and
quality
control,
assistance or any
other
technical
suppoft reqLrired
for
running the prcrjects
by
u,ay
o{ rnakig avaiiable
patented processes
and/or knorn-how and right to
avail of the techiricali
confidential. non-public,
proprietary
and an erclusive infonlation resuiting
fiom continuor-rs technicai research and deveiopment etc.
ihe technicai
kno.,r,ledgeitechnical knorvholr, will not be aplicabe for
purchase/
hiring
of
technica I assistarree.
Third
Partl'
Assessment
Third-par1v assessments, for the
purpose
of this Guicielines, are iudependent
evaluations
performed
by a specialist firrl,
chaltered
accourrting
f'jrrn
or
agency on the amout of franchisee fee(s)
set-tlecl betr..,een the franchise anil
the franchisor in coirnection to operating a franchise business
in
Bangladesh.
Third Party Assessor'
specialist
firm, chaftered
accounting firrri
or agency' that carries
out the
third
parq
asscssrnent.
Trade Mark
"Trademark"
mearls the trade mark defined in the
Section
2(8)
of the Trade
Mark Act,2009 of Bangladesh. which is
as under:
in relation to Chapter
X of
Trade
Mark Act 2009, other tlian
section 77-
a registered
trademark or
mark
used in relation to
goods
f'or thc
purpose
of indicating
a connection in the course
of trade between the
goods
and the
person
having the right as
proprietor
to use the rnark;
(ii)
a mark
used in
relation
to a service
so tliat it rna.1, be indicated
that
the
person
has the right as
proprietor
to use the mark in the
courst of
trade;
in relation to the
other
provisions
of this Act. a mark used
or
proposed
to be used in relation to any
service or
goods
indicating a connection in
the
course of trade
between the
goods
and
the
person
having tl"re right, either
as
proprietor
or as registered
user, to use the mark;
certification
trademark
jj
kk.

--- Page 116 ---
qREEfi
({r6b,
qfuRg.,
Ef,
E", ioQ.)
9bob
11. Transfer Pricing
Transfer
pricing
is the setting
of the
price
for
goods
and services
sold
between controlled
(or
related)
iegal
errtities within
an enterprise. Transfer
pricing
is a
pricing
mechanism
among willing
pafiners
in an arm's lengths
transaction which is
defined as
per
the applicable
section
of CHAPTER
XiA of
the
Income
Tix Ordinance,
1984 of Bangiadesh
as well as
globaily
accepted best
practices.
Transfer
pricing
involves
the assignment
of costs to
transactions for
goods
and services
betwen related
parties.
For example,
if a
subsidiary company
sells
goods
to a
parent
company, the cost
of
those
goods paid
by the
parent
to the
subsidiary is the transfer
price.
2.0
Types
of Permissible Fee(s)
Permission wiil
be
given
to
any
private
industrial
enterprise as registered
by
BIDA and
defined in Section
l5(3) of the Bangladesh
Investment Development
Authority Act,
2A16 for
outward remittance
on account of payment
of royalty,
technical knowledge/technical
know-how
fee(s),
technical assistance
fee(s), and
franchisee fee(s),
as mentioned in
this Guidelines.
The
permission
will also be
granted
for
outward remittance for paying
fee(s) in the nature
of operation
and
maintenance
(O&M)
services,
payable
to foreign Engineering.
Procurement
and
Construction
(EPC)
firms or contractors
or companies
associated witir
any
public
or
private project
implemented
in Bangladesh.
3.0 General Conditions
The permission
for
outward rernittance
repatriation wiil
be allowed under
the
following
conditions:
Private
industrial
enterprises
as
registered
by BIDA
and
clefined in
Section 15(3)
of the Bangladesh
lnvestment Development
Authority
Act,20i6
will be considered
for such permission.
All
proposals
for
outward remittance
will be
considered
based on the
value addition
of the transaction.
Transaction
of no or minimum
value
addition,
transaction
made without following
arm's length princ.iple
and/or transaction
of rudimentary
nature will
be discouraged.
c) Fee(s) wili
be allowed
to
remit
by the local
companies to
their foreign
collaborator
usually
on a
yearly
basis. This condition
of remittance
may
be relaxed
in case
of a
genuine
contraetual
obligation
for any
Lransaction.

--- Page 117 ---
9b)o
<REm{
(tlrqf
q&RE,
xlf r.",
\ot)
4.0
Procedures
of Remitting
Fee(s)
4.1
Payment
of
royalty, tecnical
lonwledge/technical
lorcwhow,
technical
as s istanc
e and
fr
anchis
e F e e
4.1.1
As a
general
principle, an industrial
enterprise
(registered
with BIDA)
will
be allowed
to remit
permissible amount
of fee(s)
as specified
in Schedule
for
the
puryose of
paying royalty,
technical
knorvledge/technical
know-how,
technical
assistance
and franchise
to
the foreign
collaborators
directly
through
Authorized
Dealer
(AD)Banks
in Bangladesh
without
prior
approval
from
BIDA
while
complying
with the
provisions
(scope
of
services,
payment amount,
payment schedule
and other
applicable
conditionalities)
as
stated in
the
concerned
contract
between
the
parties
rvhich
has been
pre-endorsed
by
BIDA
beforehand,
subject
to the
following conditions:
This
provision
will be applicable
only
for
post-sewice cases
and
against
a service
completion
certificate
from the
beneficiaries.
The industrial
enierprise(s)
have to
apply to
BIDA
in
prescribed
format
for endorsing
the
contracts
immediately
after
signing
and
before
any
remittance takes
plase.
Designated
official
of BIDA,
after
ensuring
approval
from appropriate
authorities,
will endorse
the contract
with
his/her signature
and
seal in
each
and every
page(s) of the
contract.
The endorsement
letter
such
issued shall
clearly
state the
titles/names,
respective
limits,
timeframes,
conditionality
and schedules
of
payments of fees.
BIDA
may require
the applicant
to revise
the contract
to comply
with the
provisions
of
this Guidelines
before the
endorsement
is
provided.
One
contract will
require endorsement
from BIDA
only for once
and
can afterwards
be used
for multiple
remittance
transactions
as long as
these
remains u,ithin
the
purview/limit of the endorsed
payment
schedule
of the endorsed
contract However,
re-endrosedments(s)
of
the contracts
will be
requried
if any change/update/improvement
of
the contract
takes
place
later.
During
repatriation
of the
remittance(s),
the concerned
industrial
enterprise
will
ensure that the
purpose of the
remittances
complies
with the
provisions
(scope
of services,
payment
amount,
payment
schedule
and
other applicable
conditionality)
of the
contracV
agreement
endorsed
by BIDA.

--- Page 118 ---
<I(qfcq.i
(tirqD,
qBks,
qt6
Q.oQ.)
sb))
BIDA
will
su_egest
an
application
fonnat
and a list
of required
documentation
to
be complied
with
by the
industrial
enterprises
as
rvell
as to
be followed/checked
by the AD Banks
in
processing
the
remittance
repatriation
applications.
Copy of the contract
endorsed
by BIDA
should
be considered
as a mandatory
document
when
an
application
for remittance
is
made
by the industrial
enterprise(s)
to
the AD
Banks.
AD Banks
will
fufther
ensure
that the
provisions
of the relevant
guidelines
of BIDA
and the
Bank is
fully complied
with.
After
the remittance
repatriation
is cornpleted,
AD
Banks will
forward
all
relevant
documents
to BIDA
for information
and post
facto
verification.
BIDA
may carry
out
post
facto
verification
of
all
or
some of the
transactions
so
happened
and may
take appropriate
pecuniary
nteasures
against
the concerned
industrial
enterprise
if
any
deviation
and
discrepancies
are
found.
BIDA will
keep
the
Bangladesh
Bank
informed
about
any
such incident(s),
if
so
happen.
Concerned
AD Banks
will
appropriately
follow
all the relevant
banking
and reporting
rules
and regulations
while
carrying
out the
remittance
repatriation
as
are described
in this
Guidelines.
Banglsdesh
Bank
witl have
the
authority
take
appropriate
actions
against
any
such banks
if any
deviation
and discrepancies
of
existing
rules
and
regulations
are
observed
4.1.2 ln
cases the amount
of remeittance
for
the purpose
of paying
royalty,
technical
knowledge/
technical
know-how,
technical
aspistance
and
franchise
to
the foreign
collaborators
exceeds
the limit
mentioned
in
sehedule
prior
approval
frorn
BIDA
will
be reqired
before remitting
the same
through
the
AD
Banks.
4.2
Payment
of Fee(s)
in Advance
Advance payment
oI rernittances
will
be allowed,
only with
prior
approval
from
BIDA
on eacir
and
every
case
of
repatriation,
on foirowi,g
conditions:
Technicai
knowledge/technical
knowhow
or
technical
assistance
fee(s)
up
to
US$ 10,000
per
agreement
will
be
allowed
to remit
once
year.
This
advance payment
must
be adjusted
with
the
accumulated
C&F
value
of irnport
of
machineries
or with
the
sales
revenue
of the
cornpany
after going
into
operation.

--- Page 119 ---
sb)n
qitqirq'{
(rl6qB,
qm@,
v# c.o,
r.od)
(ii)
Advance
payment
beyond the limit stateC in
para
4.2
will be
allol.red only
ix
the terms
and
conditions mentioned in the contract
(verifredl/endorsed
by BIDA) signed between the local company
and
the foreign company.
(iii)
Any kind of advance
payment
as stipulated in this Guidelines must
be adjusteri
with
the 6Yo of
the
C&F value of
all imported
rnachineries or with the 6a/o of the
revenue/sales rvithin two
(02)
years
of starting
commercial operation. BIDA may
consider any
request to extend the duration of adjustment
in cases of
unforeseeable situation.
(iv)
Applications
fr-rr
allowing
advance
payment
as stipulated in this
Cuidelines
rnust
be
accompanied
with
bank
guarantee,
affidavit or
an.v other app:'opriate
guarantee.
Payrnent rrf l'ee(s) to Contraetor(s) in a Project
Cirntracr.or(.s)
forrn
foreign couutries and operating in Bangladesh
with arrSr
public
or
private project
witl be allowed to remit lee(s),
only
with prinr approval from BIDA on each and every case of
repatriation, The
payment
of such fee(s)
may
be allowed on
quarteriy,
semi-annually and annual basis as stipulated
in the
agreement.
If any ioca! oompany
made an agreement with an intemational
service
provider for
delivering
any
service
produced locally
or
imported from
overseas,
the local company can apply for
permission to remit iee(s) eanied from that
service.
BIDA
will
eramine issues related to
such
transaction while
granting
any
permission
fr:r such outword remittance.
Fee(s) beyond
permislible
anrounts
Pi'oposai for outword remittance exceeding 6oh
(for
tire cases of royalt-vl
technical knowledge/technical know-hodtechnical assistance) will need
p;"ior
approval
from BiDA,
even
if
the
concerned contractlagreement
contains endorsement
from BIDA. BIDA may consider
stich
proposals
that
generate'significant
continuing impact on the economy
and have substantial
linkage/value
creation,
generate
significant number
of
employment,
trarrsfler
advariced technology, enhance skill
of local force, andior diversifo
agricrrltural.
manilfacturing and service sector of the country.
4.3
5.0

--- Page 120 ---
<iia16q1
(riTqB,
qt-'-i-<$. qi5
Q.o,
a.oQ.)
6.0
Transfer Pricing
Issues
If the
proposed
remiffance
is
being paid/remitted
to
a sister concern or
parent
or
subsidiary of
the
applicant
company,
a third-party assessrnent
should be
submitted explaning whether
the Ann's
Length
principal
has been followed in
the said transaction
in accordance rvith
the rules stipulated in
the
lncorle
Tax
Ordinance
1984
(and
as amrnended).
7.0
Matters to be
dealt by Bangladesh
Bank
Bangladesh
Bank
may look into
the issues of remittances
that are beyond the
scope
of BIDA and
of tiris
Guideiines.
Bangladesh
Bank may issue
operational
instructions time to time
to the Authorized Dealer
Banks with regards
to
remittances
of
foreign
exchanges in the rnentioned
areas
based on requests
by
BIDA.
8.0 Application Procedure
Both manual and
Online Applications for contracUagreement
endorsements
and
reinittance repatriation
(as
applicable
according
to the
provisions
of
Paragraph
4.0) will be accepted
in BIDA. Applications
can be made
together with relevant
documents according
to
prescribed
aplication format.
Online applications
can
be submitted through
BIDA website
at
www.bida.gov.bd
or \.vlyw.
bidaquickserv.ore.
BIDA, wherever
applicable, r,vili
examine necessary
documents
related
with the
projects,
all tvpes
of contractual
documents, financial
agreernents, as well
as
other essential/associated
documents
as
deemed
necessary
to
assess
the
proposed
transaction. Applications
will
be considered based
on
the
merits
of
the proposals
such as
: technoiogy
transfer, linkage/value
creation, employment
generation,
local
skill enhancement,
diversification
of new manufacturing
and service
sectors.
9.0 Authenticity
of the
Submitted Inforrnation
The applicant must
have to submit
an undrtaking to
BIDA mentioning
that all
records,
documents, information
and
statements submitted
and/or furnished
are
authentic and true. BIDA reserves
all rights
to take appropriate
legal action
and
impose pecuniary penalty
if
any false or fabricated
document and
information
have
been submiued or furnished. BIDA
also reserves
the right
to take legal
action
and/or file criminal case(s)
against the
applicant if it is found
or detected
in future that false
information
and/or false or fabricated
document(s)
were
given
or submitted witir
any
proposal
for remittance.

--- Page 121 ---
cb58
<IiEr"'l.i
('[q'tr.
sftl-<F.
qt'
"io,
),ot]
10.0
Amendments
of
the
Guidelines
BIDA will
have
the autholity
to amend
and replace
any
part
andlor
the whoie
of
the
Guideiines
as anC
r,r'iten
required.
11.0 Repealing
of
:iii
prer.icus
Guidelines
All previous guidelines.
circulars,
orders. rules
and/or acts issued
by erstwhile
Board
of Investurent
and/or BIDA
on issues
related to
outward remittances
are
repealed
henceforth.
Nevertheless,
decisions
made
on repealed guidelines,
circulars,
orders, rules
and/or acts
will be deemed
to
be
valid
under
this
Guidelines, rvhile
only
the pending
decisions will
be finalized
based on previous
guidelines,
circtrlars,
orders,
rules and/or
acts.
MOIISINA
YASMIN
Executive
Member
(Additionat
Secretary).

--- Page 122 ---
<l(qtm-i
(r]cqB,
qfuRw,
qi6
a.o, i.oQ.)
\9b5e
Schedule
Permissible
amount of
fee(s) to
tre remitted
rvithout
BIDA's
approval
(pursuant to
the
provisions
ofParagraph
4.1)
1.0
Royaltv,
technical
knowledge/technical
knolt'-how,
technical
assistance
fee(s)
For
projects under
implementation,
not exceeding
6Yo of the
total
accumulated
C&F
value of
imported
machineries
of
the concurrent
;'ear(s)
before
going into commercial
operation;
For
projects under
cotnmercial
operation,
not exceeding
6Yo of
the
previous
years'
sales
(excluding Vaiue
Added Tax)
as declared
in the
income tax
returns.
2,0 Franchise
fee(s)
Fee(s)
more than
US$
0.1 million USD
will be
allowed
to be remitted
in
instalhnents.The
50oh of the
approved
claim wili be
allowed
to remit
in the
1st
year,
30Y,
in the
2nd
year,
and the
rest of the
20'Yo in the
3'd
year.
3.0
Advance
fee(s)
All advance
paynents, if
allowed
before
generating revenue
must be
adjusted
within
one
year
of
going into commercial
operation
by the entity.
4.0 Fee(s)
payable to Contractor(s)
in
project
In case of
recurring
payments required by
any obligatory
agreement,
maximum
60/o
of sales
revenue
(excluding
Value
Added
Tax) as declared in
the
previous
year's income tax
return or VAT
return
(VAT
rehuns
will
be
considered
only for
the first
year
in case of
new
project) *uy be allowed.
The
payment of such
fee(s) may be
allowed on
quarterly,
semi-annually
and
annual
basis as stipulated
in
the agreement.
smrxr
Effit{'
Rlrw
(Bffi<),
B"nfrflars,
<lRotrn"i
)K-+,]fr
TfrilET,
reartrc,
rt+t
eg'o
1&u
Trs{qT r<flr
frftor,
U,i'tRDr-{s
(S"FiB<),
<i(Ercq-i
rF<T
e1-6p1-{T
qft{,
Nffis,
fi-stq{f
qslFis
web site:
www. bgpress.
gov.
bd