--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 5

Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd


FE Circular No. 21






Date: May 16, 2019

All Authorized Dealers of
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Foreign Exchange Transactions by the Enterprises of
Hi-Tech Parks (HTPs) in Bangladesh.

Please refer to relevant instructions of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions
(GFET)-2018, Vol-1 and subsequent FE Circulars for foreign exchange transactions of
enterprises operating in Export Processing Zones (EPZs) and Economic Zones (EZs). To
facilitate foreign exchange transactions for enterprises located at Hi-Tech Parks (HTPs)
established by Bangladesh Hi-Tech Park Authority (BHTPA) under the Act ÔThe Bangladesh Hi-
Tech Park Authority Act, 2010 (Act No. 8 of 2010)’, it has been decided to formulate a separate
set of instructions for Authorized Dealers (ADs) including Off-shore Banking Units (OBUs) as
stated below:

1. Enterprises of HTPs and their Category

Enterprises of HTPs will mean industrial and business enterprises established in different
HTPs and will also include park developers and other service providing enterprises exclusively
formed and registered to serve a particular HTP and Private Software Technology Parks
authorized by BHTPA. For foreign exchange regulatory purpose, enterprises of HTPs shall be
categorized in three types as follows:



(a) 'Type A': 100 percent foreign owned including those owned by Bangladeshi nationals
ordinarily resident abroad;


(b) 'Type B': Joint venture between foreign investors and Bangladeshi entrepreneurs
resident in Bangladesh;



(c) 'Type C': 100 percent owned by Bangladeshi entrepreneurs resident in Bangladesh.

2(a). Foreign Investment in HTPs: Foreign investors are free to invest in HTPs, subject
to registration with BHTPA. Foreign investment in HTPs (in 'Type A' and 'Type B' Units) shall
have to be reported to FEID, Bangladesh Bank within 14 (fourteen) days of issuance of shares
favoring non-resident investors as per instructions mentioned in paragraph 2, chapter 9 of GFET.
Such investment shall have to be reported to Statistics Department, Bangladesh Bank also as
mentioned in paragraph 25, chapter 2, GFET (Vol-2) and subsequent circulars/circular letters.

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 5

Similarly, transfer of shares of the companies not listed in the stock exchanges, from resident to
non-resident, non-resident to resident and non-resident to non-resident shall have to be reported
to Bangladesh Bank including additional documents mentioned in paragraph 2(B), chapter 9 of
GFET.



2(b). Temporary Non-Resident Taka/Foreign Currency Account for foreign
investors: ADs may open Non-Resident Taka Account (NRTA) in the name of the proposed
company/enterprise of foreign investors contemplating to invest in Bangladesh without prior
approval of Bangladesh Bank as mentioned in paragraph 2(C), chapter 9 of GFET. Temporary
foreign currency accounts may also be opened in their name to park fund remitted from abroad
on account of equity by ADs and OBUs in case of Type A enterprises, subject to observance of
the same instructions as noted in paragraph 2(C), chapter 9 of GFET.

3. Maintaining FC Accounts and Taka Accounts by Enterprises of HTPs

Enterprises of HTPs shall maintain FC accounts without prior permission of Bangladesh
Bank as mentioned in chapter 13, section V, of GFET with ADs. 'Type A' enterprises may also
open and maintain such accounts with OBUs of scheduled banks of Bangladesh. Proceeds from
exports of goods or providing services by enterprises of HTPs shall be retained and used through
such FC accounts in accordance with instructions as mentioned in chapter 13, section V of
GFET. Besides, equity from foreign shareholders and loan received in foreign currency from
authorized sources may be credited in such FC accounts of 'Type A' and 'Type B' enterprises of
HTPs. In case of inward remittance on account of equity, ADs and OBUs in case of Type A
enterprises may issue a certificate (Appendix 5/39 or 5/40 of GFET as the case may be) with the
amount credited in FC account mentioning equivalent Taka as mentioned in paragraph 2, chapter
9 of GFET. Moreover, authorized external loan proceeds may be credited in FC accounts of
'Type C' units of HTPs. Enterprises of HTPs may open and maintain Taka accounts in the same
manner as mentioned in chapter 13, section V, of GFET. However, developers and other service
providing enterprises exclusively formed and registered to serve a particular HTP and Private
Software Technology Parks authorized by BHTPA as mentioned in paragraph 1, may, at the
request of the industrial enterprises, receive service charges/fees either in FC or BDT (subject to
authorization by BHTPA) for crediting the concerned accounts as the case may be as mentioned
above. All foreign currency and local currency payment obligations of HTP enterprises shall be
met from FC accounts and BDT accounts of the enterprise concern respectively as mentioned
above. Balances of such FC accounts may be used through International Cards as mentioned in
paragraph 2(b), chapter 19 of GFET.

4. Export/Selling of goods/services from HTPs

Selling of goods from HTPs to abroad and to other places of Bangladesh through LC or
contract (including sales within HTP, to other HTPs, to EPZs/EZs, to other areas of Bangladesh)
shall be treated as exports. Exports from HTPs (abroad/within Bangladesh) are subject to the
usual requirement of declaration in 'EXP Form' (without EXP Form in case of export in non-

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 of 5

physical form in terms of paragraph 23(b), chapter 8 of GFET) and repatriation of export
proceeds mentioned in chapter 8 of GFET. For identification, EXP Forms for these exports (in
physical form) should be rubber stamped with words "EXPORT FROM HTP" in bold letters.


5. Selling of Bangladeshi goods or raw materials or non-physical contents to enterprises
of HTPs

Selling of permissible Bangladeshi goods or raw materials including non-physical
contents to enterprises of HTPs through LC or contract shall be against convertible FC only to be
received from FC accounts maintained by the enterprises of HTPs with ADs (also OBUs for
'Type A' enterprises) as mentioned above subject to compliance with other relevant instructions
issued by BHTPA, NBR and Ministry of Commerce and such selling shall be treated as exports
from Bangladesh within the purview of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947. Therefore,
normal foreign exchange regulations concerning declaration of exports on 'EXP Forms' in case of
export in physical form and repatriation of proceeds shall be applicable for exports to HTPs from
other areas of Bangladesh.

6. Import by enterprises of HTPs

(a) For import from abroad by the enterprises of HTPs through LC or contract, usual IMP
Form reporting procedures will, however, be applicable as mentioned in chapter 7 of GFET. For
using foreign exchange fund from AD, instructions as mentioned in paragraph 21, chapter 16 of
GFET shall be applicable for enterprises of HTPs. However, 'Type C' enterprises of HTPs shall
be allowed to obtain foreign exchange from ADs to settle obligations for importing capital
machinery by the conversion of equivalent amount of equity and/or authorized loan received in
local currency. Similarly, 'Type B' enterprises may be allowed to convert their local
equity/authorized loan received in local currency into foreign exchange to settle obligations for
importing capital machinery if equity/authorized foreign loan received from abroad falls short to
meet such obligations as per instruction mentioned in paragraph 19, chapter 16 of GFET.

(b) Payment against import of non-physical contents (software, bandwidth etc.) through
e-delivery is subject to observance of the following instructions:

i. Customs assessment of the purchases: Import of non-physical contents through e-
delivery needs customs assessment on the basis of import permit/ certificate issued by BHTPA to
the effect that the purchase of non-physical contents is genuine and sourced from reliable
supplier.

ii. Outward remittances: On receipt of customs assessment order/bill of entry and
documentary evidence of payment of duties/taxes, if applicable, ADs may effect payment against
the purchase of non-physical contents subject to compliance of the following conditions:


a) ADs shall be satisfied with the certification/license issued by the supplier that the non-
physical contents has already been received by the purchaser;



b) ADs shall observe due diligence and comply with AML/CFT regulations in respect of
the transactions;

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 5






c) ADs shall keep an authenticated copy of the certification/license issued by the supplier
and report the transactions on IMP Form to Bangladesh Bank in monthly returns/schedules.

d) Instructions as stated above are applicable for OBUs executing transactions on behalf
of 'Type A' enterprises.

7. Credit Facilities

For obtaining credit facilities from abroad (including from parents, associates or
shareholders), other associates in Bangladesh, other banks in Bangladesh (both long and short
term, as the case may be) by the enterprises of HTPs, instructions mentioned in chapter 16,
section-II of GFET and its subsequent circulars shall be applicable. However, for obtaining
medium and long term debt from abroad/OBUs of scheduled banks in Bangladesh by the
enterprises of HTPs, applications for borrowing approvals shall have to be submitted to
Bangladesh Bank through BHTPA following the procedures as mentioned in paragraph 7,
chapter 15 of GFET.



8. Repatriation of dividend to non-resident Shareholders of 'Type A' and 'Type B'
enterprises of HTPs

ADs (also OBUs for 'Type A' enterprises) may remit dividends favoring non-resident
shareholders of 'Type A' and 'Type B' enterprises of HTPs without prior permission of
Bangladesh Bank subject to observance of the instructions stipulated in paragraph 31, chapter 10
of GFET. However, submission of documents to Bangladesh Bank as mentioned in paragraph
31(e), chapter 10 for post facto checking will not be required though usual reporting, online
returns etc. shall be submitted by ADs/OBUs.

9. Repatriation of disinvestment proceeds by non-resident shareholders

Sales proceeds of shares held by non-resident investors of HTP enterprises listed with the
stock exchange(s) may be repatriated without prior approval of Bangladesh Bank following the
instructions mentioned in paragraph 3(A), chapter 9 of GFET. Repatriation of sales proceeds of
shares held by non-resident investors of HTP enterprises not listed with the stock exchange(s)
may be effected with prior permission of Bangladesh Bank in accordance with FEID Circular
No. 1, dated May 06, 2018.

--- Page 5 ---
Page 5 of 5


10. Repatriation of royalty, technical know-how and technical assistance fees

ADs (also OBUs for 'Type A' enterprises) may remit the royalty, technical know-how and
technical assistance fees of enterprises of HTPs from their FC accounts without prior permission
from Bangladesh Bank or BHTPA if the total fees and other expenses connected with above
mentioned purposes do not exceed the following limits:


(a) for new projects, not exceeding 6 (six) percent of the cost of imported machinery;

(b) for ongoing concerns, not exceeding 6 (six) percent of the previous year's sales as
declared in the income tax returns.

However, remittance of such fees in excess of the prescribed limit is subject to prior
specific approval from BHTPA. Besides usual reporting to Bangladesh Bank, each transaction
shall have to be reported to BHTPA also.

11. Working in HTPs by foreign nationals

Foreign nationals working in HTPs (with valid work permit issued by BHTPA) and who
have salary income as per work permit in Bangladesh are permitted to make monthly remittances
to the country of their domicile out of their current savings upto 75 percent of their net income as
mentioned in paragraph 8, chapter 11 of GFET. They are also permitted to remit 100 percent of
leave salary, actual savings and all pension benefits without prior Bangladesh Bank approval as
mentioned in chapter 11 of GFET.

12. Reporting

ADs shall report all foreign exchange transactions of enterprises of HTPs through 'Online
Foreign Exchange Transaction Monitoring System' of Bangladesh Bank. Such transactions are
also to be reported in monthly returns to Statistics Department, Foreign Exchange Operation
Department and other concerned offices of Bangladesh Bank in relevant Statements (S-10 and S-
11), Schedules, etc. as mentioned in paragraph 14, chapter 2, GFET (Vol-2).


Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of your concerned clientele.




Yours faithfully,


(Mohammad Khurshid Wahab)
General Manager
Phone: 9530123