--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 2

Website: www.bb.org.bd

Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

December 27, 2012
BRPD Circular No. 19 Date: ------------------------------







Poush 13, 1419

Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Loan Classification and Provisioning

Please refer to BRPD Circular No.14 dated September 23, 2012 and attached CL formats
on the captioned subject.
With a view to expediting the economic growth triggered by the comparatively small
scale borrowers and promoting financial inclusion, following amendments have been brought
into the circular:
1. “2. a) (4). Loans except Short-term Agricultural & Micro-Credit in the "Special
Mention Account" and “Sub-Standard” will not be treated as defaulted loan for the purpose of
section 27KaKa(3) [read with section 5(GaGa)] of the Banking Companies Act, 1991. However,
Fixed Term Loans amounting up to Tk. 10.00 Lacs in the “Sub-Standard” category will also be
treated as defaulted loan for the same purpose.”
2. “2. a) (7) :
(A) In case of any installment(s) or part of installment(s) of a Fixed Term Loan
amounting upto Tk. 10.00 Lacs is not repaid within the due date, the amount of unpaid
installment(s) will be termed as ‘past due or overdue installment’. In case of such types of Fixed
Term Loans:
i. If the amount of past due installment is equal to or more than the amount of
installment(s) due within 06 (six) months, the entire loan will be classified as
''Sub-standard''.
ii. If the amount of past due installment is equal to or more than the amount of
installment(s) due within 09 (nine) months, the entire loan will be classified as
''Doubtful".

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 2

iii. If the amount of past due installment is equal to or more than the amount of
installment(s) due within 12 (twelve) months, the entire loan will be classified as
''Bad/Loss''.
(B) In case of any installment(s) or part of installment(s) of a Fixed Term Loan
amounting more than Tk. 10.00 Lacs is not repaid within the due date, the amount of unpaid
installment(s) will be termed as ‘past due or overdue installment’. In case of such types of Fixed
Term Loans:
i. If the amount of past due installment is equal to or more than the amount of
installment(s) due within 03 (three) months, the entire loan will be classified as
''Sub-standard''.
ii. If the amount of past due installment is equal to or more than the amount of
installment(s) due within 06 (six) months, the entire loan will be classified as
''Doubtful".
iii. If the amount of past due installment is equal to or more than the amount of
installment(s) due within 09 (nine) months, the entire loan will be classified as
''Bad/Loss''.
Explanation: If any Fixed Term Loan is repayable on monthly installment basis, the
amount of installment(s) due within 06 (six) months will be equal to the sum of 06 monthly
installments. Similarly, if the loan is repayable on quarterly installment basis, the amount of
installment(s) due within 06 (six) months will be equal to the sum of 2 quarterly installments.”

This circular will come into force with immediate effect and all others instructions as
well as attached CL formats of BRPD Circular No.14 dated September 23, 2012 will remain
unchanged.

Please acknowledge receipt.
Yours sincerely,



(Md. Anwarul Islam)
Deputy General Manager
Phone-9530094