--- Page 1 ---
Page | 1


SME and Special Programmes Department
Bangladesh Bank
(The Central Bank of Bangladesh)
Head Office, Dhaka
Post Box # 325
Website: www.bb.org.bd

SMESPD Circular # 01

Date:
14 Kartik 1420
29 October 2013


Chief Executives /Managing Directors
All Scheduled Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions
Head Office

Dear Sir:
‘Funding Assistance Program’ for Islamic Shariah-Based Financing to ‘Agro-based Product Processing
Industries in Rural Areas’ and ‘Small Enterprises (including Women Entrepreneurs)’ in Bangladesh.

Bangladesh Bank provides funding support for setting up agro-based industries and
encourages small entrepreneurs through its refinance schemes to scheduled banks and
financial institutions for employment generation, poverty alleviation and equitable economic
growth with special emphasis to rural areas through enhanced industrial development. To
strengthen the contribution of banks and financial institutions operating under Islamic Shariah-
based principles and to ultimately ensure development and expansion of SME banking
practices, Bangladesh Bank has decided to introduce a ‘Funding Assistance Program (FAP)’
under Islamic Shariah-based financing to agro-based industries and small enterprises (including
women entrepreneurs) in Bangladesh. Under the Funding Assistance Program, banks and
financial institutions operating under Islamic Shariah-based principles can enjoy fund support
upon satisfaction of following rules:
A. General Principles:
1. Interested banks and financial institutions operating under Islamic Shariah-based
principles ought to sign a Participation Agreement with SME and Special Programmes
Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office after which they shall be known as
Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs).
2. To seek fund under the FAP, the PFIs shall open a ‘Mudaraba Fund Account (MFA)’
in their book of accounts alike their Mudaraba Savings Account (MSA). Bangladesh
Bank will supply fund at a rate of return equal to that of MFA/MSA.
3. Bangladesh Bank will charge profit on the funds supplied to participating institutions
at the rate of return of the MFA/MSA quoted for the previous quarter. Adjustments
will be made with the realised rate of return of MFA at the end of each year. The PFIs
shall report the provisional profit rate of MFA/MSA at the end of each quarter to
Bangladesh Bank. A PFI having a provisional profit rate below the Bank Rate in its
MFA/MSA will cease to be eligible for fund support from the FAP.

--- Page 2 ---
Page | 2

4. To gain funding support from FAP all PFIs ought to abide by “Guidelines for Islamic
Banking”, “Prudential Regulations for Banks”, “Prudential Regulations for Financial
Institutions” and other regulations put in force by Bangladesh Bank from time to time.
5. The selection of investment clients, sanctioning and disbursement of investments,
creation of charge, determination of debt-equity ratio and margin, arrangement of
insurance, monitoring and ensuring proper utilization of fund, etc. shall be governed
by the rules of PFI, principles of Islamic Shariah and the relationship between banker
and customer. The realization of investment shall be the sole responsibility of the
investing PFI.
6. A PFI shall submit application for fund support under the FAP against their sanctioned
investments on a monthly basis along with copies of sanction advice, acceptance
letters from clients and other required documents. The application for fund against
investment sanctioned during a particular month must be submitted on the 5th
working day of the following month. However, an investment proposal sanctioned
before 35 days from the date of application to Bangladesh Bank for funding support
shall not be entertained.
7. A PFI shall mention the tentative disbursement date of the investment. The PFI must
make the disbursement within 5 working days from the date of receipt of fund from
Bangladesh Bank. If a PFI fails to disburse fund within the stipulated 5 working days,
it must notify the event to Bangladesh Bank within next 3 working days in which case
Bangladesh Bank shall withdraw the fund along with profits for applicable days, if
any.
8. A PFI shall place a Demand Promissory Note at each instance equal to the amount of
fund support from Bangladesh Bank.
9. Bangladesh Bank shall withdraw the funds provided to PFIs with profit from their
current account maintained in the Motijheel Office of Bangladesh Bank according to
applicable withdrawal schedule.
10. The PFIs shall maintain/supply all the necessary information/statements relating to the
proper utilization of funds from time to time.
11. If any PFI enjoys fund support from this FAP by providing false information then the
amount of fund provided will be revoked by debiting the current account of the PFI
maintained in the Motijheel Office of Bangladesh Bank at once with profit at double
the prevailing rate in MFA/MSA.
12. Fund supports under the FAP will be provided only for investments sanctioned after
the issuance of this circular.
13. The interested banks and financial institutions under Islamic Shariah-based principles
are to collect samples of required participation agreement, demand promissory note,
application for fund etc. from SME and Special Programmes Department of
Bangladesh Bank.

B. Principles for Funding Support Scheme for Financing Agro-based Product Processing
Industries in Rural Areas:

14. 100% fund support will be provided against investments by PFIs in agro-based
industry under this scheme.

--- Page 3 ---
Page | 3

15. The agro-based industry must be situated outside the perimeter of divisional sadars
and Narayanganj city.
16. The value of fixed assets (excluding the value of land and building) of the agro-based
industry must not exceed BDT 10 crore.
17. Funding supports under the scheme will be available for working capital, mid-term,
and long-term investments. The tenure shall be 1 year for working capital investment,
3 years for mid-term investment and 5 years for long-term investment.
18. The profit rate realized at the client level under this scheme shall not exceed more
than the prevailing Bank Rate (currently 5%) plus the rate of the Mudaraba Savings
Account of the PFI.
19. Funds taken by PFIs under this scheme will be withdrawn as per following rules:
a. Working Capital Investment: Fund shall be withdrawn with profit in a single
instalment after the end of 1 year.
b. Mid-term Investment: Fund shall be withdrawn with profit in quarterly
instalments within a maximum period of 3 years with moratorium period, if
applicable.
c. Long-term Investment: Fund shall be withdrawn with profit in quarterly
instalments within a maximum period of 5 years with moratorium period, if
applicable.
d. Moratorium Period: Moratorium periods may be provided in multiples of 3
months which shall not exceed 6 months to make calculations simple.
Example: If moratorium period is not offered, a fund support for 3-year mid-
term investment shall be taken out in 12 instalments. But if a moratorium period
of 3-month is allowed the fund will be taken out in 11 instalments. In this case,
1st instalment will be collected at the end of 6-month from the date of fund
support and funds will be collected in quarterly instalments thereafter.
20. Investment made in the agro-based industrial sectors identified in the SMESPD
Circular Letter # 1 dated 31 July 2012 will be eligible for funding support under this
scheme.

C. Principles for Funding Support Scheme for Financing Small Enterprises
21. Cottage, micro and small entrepreneurship as defined in SMESPD Circular # 1 dated
19 June 2011 undertaken in manufacturing, service or trade sector shall be eligible
for funding support under this scheme.
22. Up to 100% fund support shall be provided by Bangladesh Bank against sanctions of
working capital and term investments worth from BDT 10 Thousand to BDT 50 Lac
by PFIs.
23. PFIs will set market-based profit-rate/mark-up on investments at client level that result
from general banker-customer relationship. However, underlining the importance of
the social good, PFIs utilizing fund under this scheme are to take continuous
measures to keep the profit rate realised from the client at the lowest possible level.
24. Priorities will be given to finances by PFIs to women entrepreneurs under this scheme
and for this purpose only, the profit rate/mark-up shall not exceed more than the
prevailing Bank Rate (Currently 5%) plus the rate of Mudaraba Savings Account.

--- Page 4 ---
Page | 4

25. 1-year working capital, 3-year for mid-term and 5-year long-term investments can be
made under this scheme. Funds taken by PFIs under this scheme will be withdrawn
as per following rules:
a. Working Capital Investment: Fund shall be withdrawn with profit in a single
instalment after the end of 1 year.
b. Mid-term Investment: Fund shall be withdrawn with profit in quarterly
instalments within a maximum period of 3 years with moratorium period, if
applicable.
c. Long-term Investment: Fund shall be withdrawn with profit in quarterly
instalments within a maximum period of 5 years with moratorium period, if
applicable.
d. Moratorium Period: Moratorium periods may be provided in multiples of 3
months which shall not exceed 6 months to make calculations simple.
Example: If moratorium period is not offered, a fund support for 3-year mid-
term investment shall be taken out in 12 instalments. But if a moratorium period
of 3-month is allowed the fund will be taken out in 11 instalments. In this case,
1st instalment will be collected at the end of 6-month from the date of fund
support and funds will be collected in quarterly instalments thereafter.
26. Investments for farming crop and fish, consumer and personal investments are not
eligible for funding support under this scheme.
Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faithfully,

(Sukamal Sinha Choudhury)
General Manager
Phone: 9511320