--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 3


Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh
website: www.bb.org.bd





Banking Regulation and Policy Department

23 January 2025
BRPD Circular Letter No. 03
Date: -----------------------

09 Magh 1431

Managing Director/Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,
Implementation of ECL-based Loan Classification and Provisioning under IFRS 9
Please refer to BRPD Circular No. 15 dated 27 November 2024 on Loan Classification and
Provisioning.
2. According to the mentioned circular, Bangladesh Bank (BB) plans to implement Expected Credit
Loss (ECL) methodology-based provisioning system for banks in accordance with International
Financial Reporting Standard (IFRS 9) by 2027. Presently, we are following rule-based loan
classification and provisioning system. As a part of our ongoing efforts to enhance the risk
management capabilities of banks and increase the transparency of the financial reporting,
Bangladesh Bank has decided to adopt ECL-based loan classification and provisioning system for
banks under IFRS 9.
3. Traditionally, the incurred-loss model is the foundation for the accounting recognition and
measurement of credit losses, varying significantly across different jurisdictions. However, in
December 2015, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) issued guidance on credit
risk and the accounting for expected credit losses, outlining supervisory expectations for banks
regarding sound credit risk practices related to the implementation and application of an ECL
accounting model. The International Financial Reporting Standard 9 (IFRS 9), which replaces IAS
39, mandates that impairment loss allowances be measured based on an ECL accounting model
instead of the incurred loss accounting model. Within the IFRS 9 framework, credit risk assessments
must include forward looking approach, which is primarily designed to mitigate procyclicality. When
evaluating ECL, it is essential to consider macroeconomic and financial factors, anticipated risks, and
associated dynamics.
4. To achieve the goal of implementing IFRS 9 for the banking sector by 2027, BB has outlined a
roadmap with the specified timelines. The details of which are provided in the following table:

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 3

Table: Roadmap of Implementation of IFRS 9
Phases
Sl.
Particulars
Timeline of
Implementation
within
Report
Submission to
BRPD
PHASE-I
(a) Formation of the ‘IFRS 9 Implementation
Team’ led by the Managing Director
(MD)/CEO.
(b) Preparation of the ‘Time Bound Action Plan
to Implement ECL-based loan classification
and
provisioning
under
IFRS
9’duly
approved by the Board of Directors (BODs)
March 2025
Within 15
April 2025.
Develop a database preserving required data
(e.g. sector wise, borrower wise and loan-nature
wise
classification
percentages,
default
percentages, loan loss recovery rates, various
macroeconomic factors etc.) of borrowers on
monthly basis from January 2022 onwards to
calculate ECL.
June 2025
Within 15 July
2025.
Prepare
pre-assessment
report
on
implementation
of
ECL-based
loan
classification and provisioning, and submit the
same to Banking Regulation and Policy
Department (BRPD). The report shall include
detailed plan for transition from existing rule-
based model to ECL model, probable challenges
and required actions to implement IFRS 9.
September 2025
Within 15
October 2025.
Conducting training and capacity building
programs on ECL-based loan classification and
provisioning for all the relevant employees.
December 2025
Within 15
January 2026.
PHASE-II
BB will issue guidelines on ECL-based loan
classification and provisioning model following
BCBS documents and IFRS 9.
January 2026
(by BB)
Finalization of automated ECL-based loan
classification and provisioning model by banks
following the BB guidelines.
June 2026
Within 15 July
2026.
Implement IFRS 9 on a pilot basis in the
branches that collectively cover at least 25% of
the total loan portfolio of the bank.
September 2026
Within 15
October 2026.
Implement IFRS 9 on a pilot basis in the
branches that cover at least 50% of the total loan
portfolio of the bank.
December 2026
Within 15
January 2027
Parallel preparation of financial statements
(provisional) on a half yearly basis under IFRS 9
and existing policy.
December 2026
and onwards
Within 15
days of
reference date.
PHASE-III
10.
Implement IFRS 9 on a pilot basis in branches
which cover at least 75% of the total loan
portfolio of the bank.
June 2027
Within 15 July
2027.
11.
Full
Implementation
of
ECL-based
loan
classification and provisioning under IFRS 9 on
pilot basis.
December 2027
Within 15
January 2028.

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 of 3


5. The readiness of the banking sector and early assessment of banks’ financial health in accordance
with IFRS 9 are essential to implement ECL-based classification and provisioning for banking sector.
In this regard, the following preparatory instructions are provided :
Banks shall prepare themselves at the institutional level by reviewing internal systems and
procedures, accounting standards, technical aspects and capacity building of their officials.
The ‘IFRS 9 Implementation Team’, led by the MD/CEO, will be responsible for
implementation of IFRS 9 of the concerned bank. They are assigned with the task of ensuring
regulatory compliance, overseeing the preservation, management, and analysis of historical
data used in the credit loss models, maintaining regular communication with BB, and
performing the necessary reporting.
The ‘IFRS 9 Implementation Team’ shall include officials from relevant departments such as
Credit Risk Management, Financial Accounts, IT, ICC etc. However, Chief Risk Officer
(CRO) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO) must be included in the team. Additionally,
employees with relevant professional degree (e.g., CA, CFA, CMA, etc.) shall be included on a
preferential basis.
Bank management shall submit quarterly reports to the BODs detailing the implementation
status of IFRS 9. With the approval of the BODs, bank shall submit a summary of the same to
the Banking Regulation and Policy Department within the following month.
Bank shall ensure that all pertinent officials receive adequate training for the implementation of
IFRS 9. To achieve this, regular training and capacity-building programs shall be organized. As
a part of capacity building and business continuity the bank shall arrange training for trainers
(ToT) program for the faculty members of the training institute by the experts of IFRS 9.
Bank shall ensure the appropriate automation, upgradation and enhancement of IT
infrastructure and system capacity as and when necessary.
Bank may consider seeking technical assistance from external experts during the
implementation of IFRS 9.
6. This directive has been issued by Bangladesh Bank in exercise of its power conferred on it under
section 49(1)(cha) of the Bank Company Act, 1991.











Yours faithfully,


(Mohammad Shahriar Siddiqui)
Director (BRPD)
Phone: 9530252