--- Page 1 ---
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
Website: www.bb.org.bd



Banking Regulation and Policy Department
BRPD Circular No. 03

08 May 2025
Date:-----------------------
25 Baishakh1432

Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh.

Dear Sir,
Transactions with Bank-Related Persons or Institutions

In order to ensure proper utilization of bank-company’s funds and to acquire and maintain the
depositors’ confidence, transactions with bank-related persons or institutions need to be
conducted transparently under explicit policies. In this respect certain provisions regarding
transactions with bank-related persons or institutions are incorporated in Sections 17, 18, 26Ga,
27, and 28 of the Bank-Company Act, 1991. Necessary amendments have been made to Sections
17, 26Ga, 27, and 28 of this said Act, through the Bank-Company (Amendment) Act, 2023.
Furthermore, to ensure proper compliance of the stated amendments and the regulations related to
transactions with bank-related persons or institutions, banks are hereby instructed to adhere to the
following instructions.

1. Definition: For the purpose of this circular-

(a) ‘Bank-related Persons or Institutions’ shall refer to the following individuals, institutions,
entities or companies:
Any director, Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer, and any other official or
person, who, in accordance with the regulations issued by Bangladesh Bank from time to
time, is deemed by Bangladesh Bank to exert significant influence on the governance or
operations of the bank-company;
(ii) A significant shareholder of a bank-company, director/partner of the significant
shareholder company/institution/organization/trust, representative director of shareholder
company/institution/organization/trust, ultimate beneficial owner of a bank-company or
any individual, institution, or company who or which exerts, or is deemed by Bangladesh
Bank to exert control, joint control, or significant influence over the bank-company;
(iii) Family members of the individuals mentioned in paragraphs 1(a) (i) and 1(a) (ii);
(iv) A company in which a bank-company or the bank-related persons mentioned in paragraph
1(a) (i) to 1(a) (iii) have control, joint control, or significant influence;
Any subsidiary company of a bank;

--- Page 2 ---
(vi) Individuals, institutions, or companies who or which are related to the persons mentioned
in paragraphs 1(a)(i) to 1(a) (iv) in the same manner described above;
(vii) Any natural person, legal person or legal arrangement through whom/which a transaction
is carried out on behalf of, or for the benefit of, the persons mentioned in paragraphs 1(a)
(i) to 1(a) (vi);
(viii) Any other individual, institution, or company deemed by Bangladesh Bank to be related to
the bank-company, based on the nature of the relationship or the transactions between
them, as per the regulations issued by Bangladesh Bank from time to time;

(b) ‘Financial transaction’ shall refer to the on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet credit
exposures, including loans, secured loans and advances, overdrafts, investments in
securities, claims arising from prepayments, deferred payments, derivatives, commitments,
letters of credit, guarantees, and other credit risk bearing facilities, as well as dealings,
including but not limited to service contracts, asset purchases and sales, construction
contracts, lease agreements, borrowings, and write-offs;
(c) ‘Credit facilities’ shall refer to the on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet credit exposures,
comprising, inter alia, loans, secured loans and advances, overdrafts, investments in
securities, claims arising from prepayments, deferred payments, derivative exposures,
commitments, letters of credit, guarantees, and any other facilities that give rise to credit
risk;
(d) ‘Significant shareholder’ shall refer to any individual, institution, company, or family
member who, directly or indirectly, solely or jointly with others, holds more than 5 percent
of the ownership shares of a bank-company;
(e) ‘Controlled institution’ or ‘controlled company’ shall refer to an institution or company of
an individual, institution, or company -
(i) where that individual, institution, or company holds a significant share or exercises
control in any other means; or
(ii) where that individual or his family members or that institution or company or any of
their subsidiary companies are directors; or
(iii) which is the sole proprietorship business or partnership firm of that individual or
his/her family members; or
(iv) where that individual, institution, or company retains the right to appoint or remove
directors or retain the ability to control its management or operations through a
contract or any other means.
(f) ‘Related Person or Institution’: If an individual or institution or company holds the position
of a director in the board of any other institution or holds 20 percent or more shares of that
institution or becomes guarantor for any loan of that institution, the person or institution
shall be considered as the related person or institution of the stated individual or institution
or company;
(g) ‘Representative Director’ shall refer to an individual authorized under Section 86 of the
Companies Act, 1994;

--- Page 3 ---
(h) ‘Loan’ shall refer to the loan as defined under Clause (Ga) of Section 2 of the Artha Rin
Adalat Ain, 2003;
(i) ‘Secured loan or advance’ shall refer to those loans or advances which are provided against
the pledge of assets and where the market value of the pledged assets, as determined by the
method prescribed by Bangladesh Bank, is never less than the amount of the loan at any
time;
(j) ‘Collateral’ shall refer to the eligible collateral as specified by Bangladesh Bank in its
directives issued from time to time;
(k) ‘Family’ or ‘family member’ shall refer to the wife, husband, father, mother, son, daughter,
brother, or sister of an individual and any dependent person on that individual;
(l) ‘Bank-company’ shall refer to any company licensed under Section 31 of the Bank-
Company Act, 1991, to operate banking business in Bangladesh, including any specialized
bank; and
(m) ‘Finance company’ shall refer to any finance company defined in Section 2, Clause 17 of
the Finance Company Act, 2023.
2. General Provisions for Transactions with Bank-related Persons or Institutions:
(a) The aggregate amount of credit facilities extended by a bank-company to its bank-related
persons or institutions and their related persons or institutions shall not exceed 10 percent of
the bank-company’s Tier-1 capital. In calculating Tier-1 capital, the capital preservation
policies issued by Bangladesh Bank from time to time under the provisions of Sub-Section
(1) of Section 13 of the Bank-Company Act, 1991, will be applicable.
(b) Any breach or violation of the credit facility limit stated in 2(a) shall be immediately
reported by the bank-company to Bangladesh Bank. In such cases, the bank-company shall
also prepare and submit an action plan, satisfactory to Bangladesh Bank, for bringing the
credit facilities to bank-related persons or institutions into compliance with the prescribed
limit within a defined timeframe set by Bangladesh Bank.
(c) If a person or institution becomes related to the bank-company after the conclusion of a
transaction with them, the bank-company shall ensure that the Board is immediately notified
of the change in relationship and all relevant existing transactions. The Board shall take
appropriate measures, within a reasonable timeframe, to ensure compliance with the
applicable provisions of this circular.
(d) Financial transactions by a bank-company with its related persons or institutions or with any
person or institution in which its directors have a connection (as guarantor or otherwise)
shall be subject to the following conditions:
(i) The financial transactions shall reflect the bank-company’s interests, and the terms of the
financial transactions must not be more favorable than those with non-related persons.
These terms include, but are not limited to, rate of interest, rate of commission, fees,
charges, margin, tenure, amortization schedules, acceptable types, quality and amount of
collateral, and other aspects of financial transactions;
(ii) The bank-company shall not engage in financial transactions that involve acquiring or
disposing of goods/assets and other services at inflated or depreciated prices relative to fair

--- Page 4 ---
market value; or conducting financial transactions that the bank-company would not
undertake with unrelated persons under comparable circumstances;
(iii) Prior approval of the majority of the bank’s Board of directors must be obtained for the
execution or renewal or any change in the terms or conditions of financial transactions and
for the modification/release/return of the primary security, collateral security, personal
guarantees, etc. Decisions of the bank-company’s Board regarding the termination or
modification of transactions with related persons or institutions shall explicitly document
the terms and conditions of such transactions and must include a formal confirmation that
the transaction is conducted solely in the interest of the bank and on terms and conditions
not more favorable than those offered in comparable transactions with non-related persons
or institutions; and
(iv) If any memorandum regarding the financial transaction with a director or his/her related
persons or institutions is submitted to the Board, the Board shall ensure that the concerned
director and his family member(s) serving as director(s) on the bank’s board refrain from
participating in the discussion, voting on the matter, or otherwise influencing the decision
in any manner. The bank-company’s Board shall establish internal procedures to ensure
that individuals who are actual or potential beneficiaries of a financial transaction with any
bank-related person or institution are not involved in the processing, approval, or oversight
of such transactions.
(e) Financial transactions conducted with any bank-related person or institution must be
approved by the shareholders at the subsequent Annual General Meeting (AGM) of the bank
and must be disclosed in the bank’s audited financial statements;
(f) In determining/identifying the ultimate beneficial owners, the instructions of the Banking
Regulation and Policy Department issued by Circular No. 16, dated 01 December 2024, and
any subsequent circulars/circular letters to be issued in this regard must be followed;
(g) In determining/identifying the group of companies/institutions, the instructions of Banking
Regulation and Policy Department issued by Circular No. 1, dated 16 January 2022, and any
other circulars/circular letters already issued or to be issued in this regard must be followed;
(h) Bank-related persons or institutions must be identified by bank-companies in accordance
with the provisions of Bank-Company Act, 1991, and this circular. The bank-company shall
maintain an up-to-date list (register) of bank-related persons or institutions, along with the
supporting information and documentation used for their identification, as well as a register
of transactions with bank-related persons and institutions. If deemed necessary, Bangladesh
Bank may conduct regular or special inspection/supervision in this regard;
(i) No bank-company shall accept its own shares as collateral security for any financial
transaction;
(j) In conducting financial transactions with any bank-related person or institution, the bank-
company shall strictly apply the same banking procedures, including loan risk analysis,
credit risk assessment, and due diligence, as are applied to transactions with non-related
persons or institutions;
(k) The updated information of the transactions with bank-related persons or institutions must
be submitted through Rationalised Input Template (RIT) to Bangladesh Bank Enterprise

--- Page 5 ---
Data Warehouse (EDW) portal within 10 (ten) days after the end of each quarter. Banks
have to submit such information from September, 2025 quarter manually, and from
December, 2025 quarter through RIT; and
(l) In addition to the above instruction, any bank-company must also adhere to the established/
existing rules and regulations for conducting financial transactions with the individuals or
institutions related to the bank, in the same manner as they would for financial transactions
with regular customers.
3. Provisions for Director and Representative Director Related Credit Facilities:
In addition to complying with the relevant provisions of the Bank-Company Act, 1991 and other
instructions in this circular, a bank-company must comply with the following instructions while
conducting any credit facility with its director/representative director and his/her family members,
their related institutions, their controlled institution or company, and any person or institution with
whom the director has a relationship as guarantor, and or the shareholding company/institution/
organization/trust which has nominated representative director or its directors or partners:
(a) Limit to Credit Facilities:
(i) The aggregate amount of credit facilities provided or to be provided to a director and
his/her family members, their related institutions, their controlled institution or company,
and any person or institution with whom the director has a relationship as guarantor shall
not exceed 50 percent of the face value of shares of that bank-company held in director’s
own name. If there is more than one director from a family, any member of the family can
avail credit facility against the total value of shares of that bank-company held by the
director/directors provided that the guarantee from the relevant director has been taken. In
the case of a public limited company, the proportion of shares held by the director or
his/her family members in that company shall be used to determine the portion of the
credit facilities to be considered with that director;
(ii) In cases where the total amount of prevailing credit facilities exceeds 50 percent of the
paid-up capital against the shares held by the director/shareholder company/institution/
organization/trust in the bank on the effective date of this circular, the matter must be
immediately presented at the meeting of the Board of Directors and must be brought to the
notice of Bangladesh Bank. Similarly, if any individual is appointed as a
director/representative director of a bank-company, and the aggregate amount of
prevailing credit facilities exceeds 50 percent of the paid-up capital against the shares held
by the director/shareholder company/institution/organization/trust in the bank, the matter
must be immediately presented at the meeting of the Board of Directors and must be
brought to the notice of Bangladesh Bank. In this case, the additional credit facilities owed
to the director/representative director/shareholder institution or company must be repaid
within the time frame specified by Bangladesh Bank. Under any circumstances neither can
the 50 percent limit for credit facilities be exceeded, nor can previously conducted
transactions be renewed, extended, or have their terms altered;

--- Page 6 ---
(b) Provisions Regarding Prior Approval of Bangladesh Bank:
(i) In cases of cumulative direct credit facilities amounting to BDT 50.00 lakh (5 million) or
more, or cumulative direct and indirect aggregate credit facilities amounting to BDT 1.00
crore (10 million) or more, with the director/representative director and their family
members, their related institutions, their controlled institutions or companies, and
individuals or institutions with whom they have a guarantee relationship, as well as
shareholder companies /institutions/organizations/trusts or their directors or partners who
have nominated the representative director, prior approval from Bangladesh Bank must be
obtained;
(ii) When any existing credit facility to a director/representative director/former director and
his/her family members, their related institutions, their controlled institutions or companies,
and individuals or institutions with whom they have a guarantee relationship, as well as
shareholder companies/institutions/organizations/trusts or their directors or partners who
have nominated the representative director is to be renewed, or when the terms and
conditions of such facility are to be changed, and when initial guarantees, supplementary
guarantees, personal guarantees, etc., provided against that are to be modified, canceled, or
refunded, bank must obtain prior approval from Bangladesh Bank. In the case of renewal of
any existing credit facility, an application signed by the Managing Director/Chief Executive
Officer must be submitted to the Banking Regulation and Policy Department (Division-2) of
Bangladesh Bank at least 07 (seven) working days before the expiration of the relevant
credit facility, along with prior approval from the Board; and
(iii) For prior approval, banks should apply to Bangladesh Bank using the attached form
(Annexure-A) duly signed by the Managing Director enclosing the following documents
and information:
1. Attested copy of the meeting minutes of the Board of Directors and the memorandum
related to the transaction;
2. The updated CIB (Credit Information Bureau) report of the concerned director and the
borrowing person or institutions;
3. Attested copy of the loan/investment sanction letters issued to at least three non-bank-
related customers (engaged in the same type of business) during the same period,
along with the ledger statements as proof of disbursement;
4. Attested copy of the original loan/investment sanction letter (containing the terms and
conditions of the financial transaction);
5. A testimonial by the bank as a certificate of the proper utilization of the existing
facilities to the person or institution mentioned in clause 3 (b) (ii);
6. Collateral valuation report by the valuation firm (where applicable); and
7. CIB Enquiry Form 1 (Annexure-B), 2 (Annexure-D) and Undertaking (Annexure-C).
(c) Provisions Regarding Acceptance of Collateral:
(i) No bank-company shall sanction any loan or advance, except for secured loans or
advances, to its director/representative director, family members, their related institutions,
their controlled institutions or companies, and any individuals or institutions associated as

--- Page 7 ---
guarantors and the respective bank’s shareholder company/institution/organization/trust.
Any such credit facility must be backed by collateral mortgaged in favour of the bank.
Additionally, personal guarantee of the director/representative director must be obtained in
all such cases;
(ii) Such credit facilities must be adequately secured with sufficient collateral. Priority should
be given to collateral such as bank deposits, gold or gold ornaments, land, buildings, and
shares of companies listed on the stock exchange;
(iii) In the case of credit facilities involving the representative director and their family
members, their related institutions, their controlled institutions or companies, and the
shareholder company/institution/organization/trust that nominated the representative
director, as well as its directors or partners, the approval and guarantee of the shareholder
company/institution/organization/trustee board/Board of Directors/partners, as applicable,
must be obtained. The relevant documents must be attached to the application submitted for
approval from Bangladesh Bank. Furthermore, in such credit facilities with the bank’s
shareholder company/institution/organization/trust, personal guarantees from all directors
or partners of the concerned company or institution must be obtained; and
(iv) In such cases, before executing any credit facility, the concerned bank must ensure that the
shares of the bank held by the respective director or shareholder company/institution/
organization/trust have not been used as collateral for credit facilities with any other bank-
company or finance company. Similarly, after executing such credit facilities, those shares
of the bank cannot be used as collateral for credit facilities with any other bank-company or
finance company.

(d) Provisions Regarding Waiver of Interest/Profit:
Before waiving any imposed or unimposed interest or profit on loans/investment facilities
granted to individuals or institutions mentioned in clause 1(a), prior approval from
Bangladesh Bank must be obtained;
(ii) Under no circumstances shall the principal amount of the loan or investment be waived;
(iii) Interest or profit on loans/investments transferred to bank’s income shall not be waived;
(iv) In the case of investment facilities granted to individuals or institutions mentioned in
clause 1(a), the investment recipient cannot be exempted from bearing any losses; and
(v) In the case of a former director who currently does not hold any shares in the bank,
interest or profit may be waived on loans or investment facilities granted to them before
they assumed the position of director or after their regular resignation from the position,
with the approval of the Board of Directors and without prior approval from Bangladesh
Bank. However, if the director was removed from his/her post by Bangladesh Bank or any
other regulatory authority, he/she will not be eligible for this benefit as described in this
clause.
4. Provisions Regarding Credit Facilities to Independent Directors:
No credit facilities can be provided to an independent director and his/her family members, their
related institutions, their controlled institution or company, and any person or institution with
which the director has a relationship as guarantor. However, if an independent director of a bank-

--- Page 8 ---
company also serves as an independent director of its subsidiary company to comply with any
regulatory requirement, the aforementioned restrictions shall not be applicable for the credit
facilities to that subsidiary company.
5. Provisions to be followed for Credit Facilities to Alternate Directors:
While serving as an alternate director, no credit facilities shall be provided to the alternate
director, his/her family members, their related institution, their controlled institution or company,
and any person or institution with which the director has a relationship as guarantor. Additionally,
no interest/profit waivers or exemptions from interest imposition shall be granted in such cases.
6. Provisions to be followed for Credit Facilities to Government-Nominated Bank Directors:
(a) No credit facilities except renewal of existing facility shall be conducted with the
government-nominated director, his/her family members, their related institutions, their
controlled institution or company, and individuals or institutions with whom they have a
guarantee relationship and the limit of the credit facility provided previously cannot be
extended;
(b) Before being appointed as a director, no changes shall be made to the terms of credit
facilities involving the director, his/her family members, or any company or institution
under their control. Additionally, no interest or profit waivers, exemptions from interest
imposition, or rescheduling of such facilities shall be allowed; and
(c) If such credit facilities become classified as default loans, immediate legal action must be
taken. The measures adopted by the bank must be promptly reported to Bangladesh Bank.

7. Provisions to be followed for Credit Facilities to the Managing Director/Chief Executive
Officer:
(a) While serving as the Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer of the bank, no credit
facilities shall be provided to him or any institution or company related to him or under his
control. Additionally, the tenure or limit of any previously provided credit facilities shall
not be extended, renewed, or modified in any way, nor shall any interest or profit waivers
or exemptions from interest imposition be granted;
(b) As the Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer of the bank is a contractual officer, no
credit facilities shall be provided to them under the financial transaction policies set for the
bank’s officers and employees. However, in the case of Country Head of foreign banks
operating in Bangladesh, the applicable policies for the relevant bank’s officers and
employees shall be followed;
(c) A credit card may be issued to the Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer under the
same terms and limits applicable to non-bank-related customers. However, Banking
Regulation and Policy Department (Division-2) of Bangladesh Bank must be notified at
least 07 (Seven) working days before issuing the credit card;
(d) No loans or advances, other than secured loans or advances, shall be granted to the family
members of the Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer, their related institutions, their
controlled institution or company without obtaining sufficient collateral;
(e) Personal guarantee of the Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer along with
sufficient secondary collateral must be obtained for any credit facilities to the family

--- Page 9 ---
members of the Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer, their related institutions, their
controlled institution or company. Priority should be given to collateral such as deposits
held with the bank, gold or gold ornaments, land, buildings, and shares of companies listed
on the stock exchange, and the provided collateral must be mortgaged in favour of the
bank. Additionally, such credit facilities must be reported to Banking Regulation and
Policy Department (Division-2) of Bangladesh Bank before 07(seven) working days of the
completion of the transaction; and
(f) No waiver of the principal of the loan or investment in full or in portion, or interest or
profit transferred to income account, shall be allowed for the bank’s Managing
Director/Chief Executive Officer, his/her family members, their related institutions, their
controlled institution or company. Additionally, prior approval from Bangladesh Bank
must be obtained before waiving any interest or profit imposed or not imposed on the loan
or investment or part thereof.
8. Provisions to be followed for Credit Facilities to Significant Shareholders:
(a) If the accumulated amount of credit facilities complete or prospective, with significant
shareholders of the bank, his/her family members, their related institutions and their
controlled institution or company exceeds BDT1.00 crore (10 million), banks must report
to Banking Regulation and Policy Department (Division-2) of Bangladesh Bank within 07
(seven) working days of executing such transaction;
(b) No loans or advances, other than secured loans or advances, shall be granted to a
significant shareholder of the bank, their family members, their related institutions, their
controlled institution or company, and any person or institution with whom the significant
shareholder has a relationship as guarantor. In such credit facilities, adequate collateral
must be provided, and the personal guarantee of the significant shareholder must be
obtained. Priority must be given to taking bank-held deposits, gold or jewelry, land,
buildings, or shares of companies listed on the stock exchange as collateral security and
the collateral security must be pledged in favour of the bank; and
(c) No waiver of the principal of the loan or investment in full or in portion, or interest or
profit transferred to the income account, shall be allowed for a significant shareholder of
the bank, their family members, their related institutions, their controlled institution or
company, and any person or institution with whom the significant shareholder has a
relationship as guarantor. Additionally, prior approval from Bangladesh Bank must be
obtained before waiving any imposed or unimposed interest or profit on such loans or
investments or its portion.
9. Provisions to be followed for Credit Facilities to Subsidiary Companies:
Prior approval from Bangladesh Bank must be obtained for any credit facilities to subsidiary
company(ies) of a bank-company.
10. Procedure of classifying Bank-related Persons or Institutions by Bangladesh Bank:
a. Bangladesh Bank, taking into account the nature of relationships, transactions, and any other
relevant affiliations with the bank-company, may classify any person or institution as a
bank-related person or institution in accordance with the definition provided in paragraph

--- Page 10 ---
10

(1)(a) of this circular. Such classification shall be made based on the decision of the
competent authority of Bangladesh Bank;
Following the issuance of the decision to classify a person or institution as bank-related
person or institution, Bangladesh Bank shall notify the concerned bank-company in
written. Until the bank-company submits evidence demonstrating the absence of
affiliation, from the date of receipt of the notification, the identified person or institution
shall be presumed to be bank-related person or institution; and
Upon receiving such evidence, the competent authority of Bangladesh Bank shall review
the submission and may decide to amend or revoke the initial notification. The bank-
company shall be informed without delay of the outcome of this review. If Bangladesh
Bank determines that the evidence is insufficient, or if the bank fails to respond within the
prescribed timeframe, the initial classification shall stand. In such case, Bangladesh Bank
shall formally notify the bank-company of its final decision and instruct the bank to record
the identified person or institution as bank-related person or institution in the relevant
registers of the bank-company.
11. Any violation of the instructions in this circular will result in disciplinary action against the
relevant bank-company, its Board of Directors, and the concerned officers under Sections 26Ga,
27, 28, and 109 of the Bank-Company Act, 1991.
12. BRPD Circular No. 04, dated 23 February 2014, is hereby repealed. However, all actions
taken previously under the instructions outlined in the aforementioned circular shall be considered
valid and in effect.
13. For the information of the Board of Directors and to take necessary actions, a comprehensive
agenda regarding the subject matter of this circular must be presented at the next board meeting
immediately following the issuance of this circular. Additionally, arrangements must be made to
bring this circular to the attention of all bank officials.
14. This circular is issued in compliance with the provisions of Sections 26Ga, 27, and 28 of the
Bank-Company Act, 1991, and under the authority granted by Sections 26Ga and 45 of the same
Act. This circular will take effect immediately.


Yours Faithfully,

(Md. Ala Uddin)
Director (BRPD)
Phone: 9530095

--- Page 11 ---
11

Annexure-A

Application Form for Credit Facilities to Bank-Related Persons or Institutions

1. Name and Address of applicant (individual/institution):
2. Nature of institution (sole proprietorship/partnership/private/public limited company):
3. Applicant’s paid-up capital and net worth:
4. a) Nature of business:
b) Purpose of the proposed credit facility:
5. Name of Group (where applicable):
6. Name, Address and shareholding percentage of the applying institution’s owners/partners/ directors:
7. Name and address of guarantor/guarantors of the credit facility applied for:
8. Name of the concerned director and relationship between applicant and director:
9. Description of the credit facility applied for:

Type
Amount
Tenure
Rate of Interest/Profit/
Commission
New
Renewal
Enhancement/
Reduction
Total
a. Funded credit facility
b. Non-funded credit
facility
Total (a+b)

10. Description of Collateral:

Type
Primary Collateral
Secondary Collateral
Total value
Description*
Value
Description*
Value
a. Funded credit facility
b. Non-funded credit
facility
Total (a+b)
(*nature of security, quantity, etc. should be described in detail as much as possible)

11. Up-to-date description of a credit facility conducted with the director/representative director/former
Director and his/her family member, their related institutions, their controlled institution or company
and any person or institution with whom the director has a relationship as guarantor, as well as with the
shareholder company/institution/organization/trust that nominate such representative directors or its
directors or partners:

Name
of the
A/C
Type of
credit
facility

Sanctioned
amount and
date of the
credit facility
Outstandi
ng amount
and date
Date
of
expiry
Description of
securities
and their
value
Classification
status
comment


Cont’d.

--- Page 12 ---
12


12. Up-to-date description of the applicant and related director’s credit exposure in other banks/ finance
companies:

Name
of the
A/C
Name
of bank/
finance
company,
branch
Type of
credit
facility

Sanctioned
amount and
date of the
credit facility
Outstanding
amount and
date
Date
of
expiry
Description
of
securities and
their value
Classification
status
comment

13. Aggregate amount of credit facilities provided along with the proposed credit facility to be provided to
the director/representative director/former director and his/her family member, their related
institutions, their controlled institution or company and any person or institution with whom the
director has a relationship as guarantor, as well as with the shareholder company/
institution/organization/trust that nominate such representative directors or its directors or partners and
description of the paid-up value of shareholding in applicant bank by director/shareholder
company/institution/organization/trust:

Aggregate amount of
credit facilities*
No. of share holding by
director/shareholder
company/institution/organization/ trust
Share value
Percentage

14. Has the share held in the name of the concerned bank director or shareholder company/institution/
organization/trust been pledged as collateral security with any bank-company or finance company? If
so, please provide the name of the concerned bank-company or finance company and the amount of
pledged shares.

15. Description of credit facilities to or for the benefit of bank-related persons or institutions including the
proposed credit facility:
[In lakh taka (BDT in million)]
Aggregate amount of credit facilities
Tier-1capital of bank
Percentage (%)

16. Has the credit risk been analyzed for proposed credit facility? If yes, mention the result:
17. Has prior approval from Bangladesh Bank been taken for any previous credit facility for this
applicant/director? If yes, mention the reference and date of approval [attach a copy of approval letter]:
18. Has any previous credit proposal of the applicant been rejected by Bangladesh Bank? If yes, mention
the reference and date [attach a copy of the letter]:

I hereby certify that the above-mentioned information is correct and no information has been concealed.


Date:
Signature:
Name:
Managing Director:
(with the official seal)

--- Page 13 ---
13

Annexure-B



Enquiry Form-1
(For Individual)
Individual data

1. Title

Name*



2. Father’s title

Father’s Name*



3. Mother’s title

Mother’s Name*



4. Spouse ’s title

Spouse’s Name



5. National ID number*
(10/17 digits)

6. TIN



7. Date of birth(dd/mm/yyyy)*

8. Gender*



9. District of birth*

10. Country of birth*




Main (Permanent)address:
12. Street no./Street name/Village/PS/Upazilla*

District*
Postal Code
Country*




Additional (Present) address:
13. Street no./Street name/Village/PS/Upazilla

District
Postal Code
Country




Identification document data
14. ID type (Passport/Driving
License/Commissioner Certificate)
ID number


ID issue date(dd/mm/yyyy):
ID issue country:



15. Telephone number

* Indicates mandatory information to be provided.
1. If Country of birth (SL 10) is Bangladesh then NID no (SL 05) is Mandatory.
2. If Country of birth (SL 10) is other than Bangladesh then Passport Information (SL 14) is mandatory.

--- Page 14 ---
14

Annexure-C


Undertaking

To
The Manager
Subject: Provision of information on the ownership of companies and their bank liabilities.

Dear Sir,
I, ………………………………owner/partner/director/guarantor of ............................................, am
applying for sanctioning/renewal/rescheduling of a loan in my own name/ aforementioned company’s
name. My father’s name:……………………….., mother’s name:……………………, husband’s name(in
case of married woman):…………………………., Permanent address: Street No/Village.………… Street
Name/PS/Upazilla…………………District……………Postal code………country…………….., Business
address: Street No/Village.………… Street Name/PS/Upazilla …………………District……………Postal
code………country…………….., Date of Birth:……………., District of Birth:……………., Country of
Birth:……………., National ID Number:……………….., Other ID documents(Passport/Driving license
/Birth
Registration
Certificate):
ID
number………….ID
issue
date……………ID
issue
country………………..,
TIN:…………………………….,
Gender:
Male/Female,
Telephone
Number:………………are given for your kind consideration. The list of companies under the ownership
of mine along with their bank liability status is given in the following table:


Serial
no.

Name of the Company
Main
Address
Additional
Address
Whether the company is
availing any loan or not
Yes
No
Name of
the
bank/FI
Name of the
branch






























Apart from stated above, if any liability in my own name or my company’s name is found, I will be bound
to obey any decision made by the authority concerned relating to sanctioning/renewal/ rescheduling of the
loan applied for and I will be punishable by law for providing this false or fabricated information.


Seal and Signature of the bank official who
certified the borrower.


Customer’s Signature:
Name:
Name of the Borrowing organization:

*If necessary, extra paper could be used for list of companies.

--- Page 15 ---
15

Annexure-D


Enquiry Form-2
(For Proprietorship/Partnership/Limited or any other Company)

Company data

1. Title

Trade Name*



2. Legal form*, **

3. TIN*




Company’s main (Permanent) address:

4. Street no./Street name/Village/PS/Upazilla*

District*
Postal Code
Country*




Additional (Business) address:
5. Street no./Street name/Village/PS/Upazilla

District
Postal Code
Country




6. Telephone number


* Indicates mandatory information to be provided.

** Indicates form of a company like Proprietorship, Partnership, Public Limited, Private
Limited, Corporation etc.