--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Investment Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FEID Circular Letter No. 01




Date: 18 June 2020

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Transfer of shares and repatriation of sales proceeds of shares in favor of
non-residents in private/public limited companies not listed with stock exchanges

FEID Circular No. 1 of May 06, 2018 outlines working procedures referring to valuation
approaches for submission of applications to Bangladesh Bank in repatriation of sales proceeds of non-
resident equity investment in non-listed public limited companies and in private limited companies.

02. To bring further simplification in repatriation of sales proceeds of non-listed shares, it has been
decided that:

a. Authorized Dealers (ADs) may effect remittances on account of sales proceeds of shares
regardless of amount, fair value of which is determined by the management of the target
companies through net asset value (NAV) approach based on latest audited financial statements
submitted together with tax returns. ADs shall satisfy themselves from the undertaking of the
target companies countersigned by auditors to the effect that in net asset value approach audited
financial statements have contained no revalued assets, intangible assets, expenses/losses shown
as asset. The certificate should specify that the impairment of assets have been adjusted. The
ADs should also be ensured that there is no abnormal growth in total assets in any of last three
years, particularly in last year;

b. No permission from Bangladesh Bank is required to repatriate sales proceeds of shares up to
Tk 10.00 million equivalent foreign currency without valuation reports from independent
valuers;

c. ADs may effect remittances of above Tk 10.00 million upto Tk 100.00 million equivalent
foreign currency on account of sales proceeds, fair value of which is determined in terms of
valuation methods prescribed in FEID Circular No. 1 dated May 06, 2018. Within 30 days of
remittances, ADs shall submit post facto reports detailing the transactions to Foreign Exchange
Investment Department at Bangladesh Bank Head Office.
Cont'd page 2

--- Page 2 ---
03. (a) ADs shall, before executing the transactions, satisfy themselves to the effect that the target
company has complied with the provision of paragraph 2(A) and 2(B), chapter 9 of the Guidelines for
Foreign Exchange Transactions-2018 (GFET), Vol-1. On completion of the transactions, ADs shall comply
with usual reporting routine and preserve the records of the transactions for eventual inspection, unless
under investigation, for a period of 5 years;

(b) ADs shall ensure that the outward remittance under the authorization as noted at 2(c) above is
executed one-time against the particular deal. Subsequent deals are, if any, subject to the instructions of
FEID Circular No. 1/2018. In case of inconsistencies identified, ADs should seek opinion from Bangladesh
Bank;

(c) ADs shall comply with Section 3(4) of The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (Amended
upto 2015) before execution of remittance.

04. As usual, ADs shall observe due diligence of KYC, AML/CFT standards, regulations on
payment of taxes and so on.

Please bring the instructions of this circular letter to the notice of your concerned clientele.


Yours Faithfully,

(Abu Saleh Mohammed Shahab Uddin)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 02-9530488