--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Investment Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
Bangladesh Bank Website: www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

FEID Circular Letter No. 04/2013 Date: 20 March, 2013

Head Offices/Principal Offices of
All Authorized Dealers (ADs) in Bangladesh.

Dear Sirs,

Facilitation of permission and renewal procedure
under Section 18B of Foreign Exchange Regulation (FER) Act, 1947.

Pursuant to Section 18B of the FER Act, 1947, it needs to take general or special
permission from Bangladesh Bank for the establishment of branch/liaison office or any other
business place in Bangladesh by any organization not registered in Bangladesh. Again, it needs
to take general or special permission from Bangladesh Bank for foreign nationals under Section
18A of FER Act, 1947 to work in Bangladeshi branch/liaison office or any other business place
of foreign organization permitted under Section 18B of the aforesaid act. To avoid delay in
starting relevant business functions due to time lag in obtaining permission, the following
decisions shall come into force with immediate effect:


(1) For taking permission from this department, application along with relevant
documents signed by the competent official of the organization shall be submitted to AD bank in
conformity with the instructions given in App. 6/3 of Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions (Vol.-1), 2009 and Circular Letter No. 02/2010 dated 23/11/2010 of this
department.

(2) An electronic copy of forwarding letter (as per Annexure-1 & 2) including
recommendation of granting permission certifying the accuracy of the client’s application and all
other received documents, signed by the chief official of foreign exchange operations of AD
bank shall be sent (gm.feid@bb.org.bd) to the General Manager, Foreign Exchange Investment
Department of Bangladesh Bank. At the same time and date, hard copy of the forwarding letter
along with all other relevant documents shall have to be sent to the same recipient. In reference
to the received message through electronic media, a primary permission from this department
will be informed to the AD bank in the following working day. This primary permission will be
considered as ad-hoc permission for the application related to the establishment of branch/liaison
office or any other business place of foreign organization and/or the application by foreign
nationals for running operation in the aforesaid type of branch/liaison office or any other
business place, and it will remain valid until further instruction is given. The aforementioned
procedures will also be applicable for other local offices of Bangladesh Bank.

(3) After receiving the hard copy of application and other relevant documents sent at the
same time and date, the concerned department/office of Bangladesh Bank will seek necessary
explanation/information if any deficiency is found in detailed scrutiny. Bangladesh Bank will
intimate instruction cancelling the initial ad-hoc permission if any satisfactory response of the
explanation/information is not received within maximum 8 (eight) weeks. If the application is
found in order and complete, a formal permission letter will be issued.

(4) If the forwarding letter of the AD bank is not sent in accordance with the prescribed
format (Annexure-1 & 2) and as per the instructions of this circular, then it will not be
acknowledged and hence, the applicant will not be considered as permitted primarily.

P.T.O.

--- Page 2 ---
-02-

(5) In case of submission of certificate related to bringing and expending of all office
expenses of permitted Bangladeshi branch/liaison office or any other business place of foreign
organization from the foreign parent company, the instructions stated in FEID Circular Letter
No. 02 dated 23/11/2010 shall have to be followed. Mentionable that, if the stated certificate is
not found along with the application as per the aforesaid circular, cancellation of permission may
be considered by Bangladesh Bank.

(6) In accordance with the instructions circulated above, section (f) of FEID Circular
Letter No. 01/2013 dated 28/01/2013 shall be considered as cancelled.

ADs are advised to play active role in implementing the decisions stated above and bring
those to the notice of all concerned. In this context, concerned ADs shall be brought under
punitive/disciplinary action if any kind of business function including export-import is hampered
or if any complaint regarding customer harassment is proved due to their negligence/slackness.

Please acknowledge receipt.


Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Nurun Nahar)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 9512605

--- Page 3 ---
E‐mail Application of the AD Bank





Annexure‐1



Ref. No: Date:

The General Manager
Foreign Exchange Investment Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.


Dear Sir,

Application for Permission (or renewal of permission)
Under Section‐18B of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.
Bangladesh Bank Permission No:‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐.

We are submitting the application of ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐--‐ (Name of the Applicant) for granting
permission (or renewal of permission) under Section‐18B of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,
1947.

We hereby certify that all the required documents mentioned in the App. 6/3 of
Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions (Vol.‐1), 2009 and Circular Letter No.‐02/2010,
dated 23/11/2010 has been received from ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ (Name of the Applicant) and verified by us. We
also certify that all the documents are found genuine and correct. We confirm that the applicant
has
already
repatriated
required
foreign
currency
to
establish/operate
the
branch/liaison/representative office as per condition given in the permission letter of Board of
Investment and encashed by us.

We have already submitted all these documents (hard copy) to your good office for
granting permission under Section‐18B of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.

We hereby also certify that all the necessary office expenses were met from the
remittances brought in Bangladesh from abroad by the branch (or liaison or representative office)
(and/or expenses met from the local source of income since the branch/liaison/representative
office has got waiver from the condition 2(iii) of Bangladesh Bank’s permission letter) and
accurately furnished in the Certificate (as per Circular Letter No.‐02/2010, dated: 23/11/2010)
attached with all other documents submitted to Bangladesh Bank.

We recommend hereby to kindly accord permission to ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ (Name of the Applicant)
under Section-18B of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.



Name:
Designation:
Phone:
Fax:
E‐mail:

--- Page 4 ---
E‐mail Application of the AD Bank





Annexure‐2



Ref. No: Date:

The General Manager
Foreign Exchange Investment Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.


Dear Sir,

Application for Permission (or renewal of permission)
Under Section‐18A of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.
Branch/Liaison/Representative Office Name:‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐-----------------

We are submitting the application on behalf of foreign expatriate Mr./Ms. ‐‐‐----‐‐‐‐‐ for
granting permission (or renewal of permission) under Section‐18A of Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, 1947.

We hereby certify that all the required documents mentioned in the App. 6/3 of
Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions (Vol.‐1), 2009 has been received from
Mr./Ms.‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ and verified by us. We also certify that all the documents are found genuine and
correct. We confirm that Mr./Ms.‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ has been maintaining an account with our branch.

We have already submitted all these documents (hard copy) to your good office for
granting permission under Section‐18A of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.

We recommend hereby to kindly accord permission to Mr./Ms.‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐ under Section-
18A of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.



Name:
Designation:
Phone:
Fax:
E‐mail: