--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 2

Website: www.bangladesh-bank.org
www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

Financial Stability Department

Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Post Box No.325
Dhaka
19 Falgun 1420
FSD Circular No. 01
Date:-------------------------
03 March 2014

Chief Executives

All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,

User Manual on the Input Template of ‘Financial Projection Model’.

The increasing complexity of the financial system over the years in Bangladesh
necessitates for appropriate supervisory tools that will address the vulnerability and
ensure the financial soundness of individual bank as well as the whole banking system. In
this regard, Bangladesh Bank has designed a tool named "Financial Projection Model
(FPM)" with the aims to assess the strengths and weaknesses of all banks individually in
the financial system based on probable shock scenarios, to perform comprehensive
scenario analyses to identify risks and to improve Bangladesh Bank's view over the risk
management capacity of individual bank. All scheduled banks are required to take part in
the implementation of the Model from March 2014.
To facilitate the implementation of the Model, an input template and a user manual have
been developed. All scheduled banks have to collect the soft copies of those from
Financial Stability Department (FSD), Bangladesh Bank on or before 31 March 2014.
It has been decided that, henceforth all scheduled banks will start quarterly reporting to
FSD as per the user manual and the input template. The reporting schedule is as follows:
Quarter
Period
Reporting Deadline (on or before)
March Quarter
January 01- March 31
May 15th
June Quarter
April 01- June 30
August 15th
September Quarter
July 01- September 30
November 15th
December Quarter
October 01 – December 31
February 15th of the next year

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 2

Initially the scheduled banks will submit appropriately filled in one (01) input template
for the quarters from December 2011 to March 2014 (10 quarters) on or before 15th June,
2014.

From June 2014 Quarter and onwards, the banks will submit the filled in template within
the aforementioned schedules.

The banks have to submit only the soft copy of the template to General Manager,
Financial Stability Department (via: gm.fsd@bb.org.bd). The banks are not required to
submit hard copy of the template. The filled in template should be sent from the official
email address of concerned bank, preferably from the email address of Head of
Finance/Accounts/Compliance Division.

Any request for the extension of deadline(s) and the use of any personal email
address for sending data on FPM are strongly discouraged.

Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours sincerely,



(Debashish Chakrabortty)

General Manager

Phone: 02-9530279