--- Page 1 ---
SME & Special Programmes Department
JICA-PIU (UBSP)






SMESPD Circular Letter No. 03 Date- 07 November 2018

CEO/MDs
All Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh
Head Office, Dhaka.


Dear Sirs,
Regarding addendum of Operating Guidelines for JICA assisted
Urban Building Safety Project (UBSP, BD-P84)

Please refer to SMESPD Circular No. 03/2016 dated 25 September 2016 and the Operating Guidelines of
UBSP project attached with the circular. With the aim of extending financial support for safe working
environment of RMG sector and smooth implementation of the project, the following amendments in the
Operating Guideline have been made:

1.3 Management Structure of the Project
1.3.2 (3) Composition of PMC 1
The existing table will be replaced by the following Table:
No
Organization
Title in Organization
Title
Financial Institutions Division
Secretary
Chairman
Bangladesh bank
Representative
Member
PWD
Project
Director
of
PWD-PIU
Member
Department of Inspection for Factories and
Establishments
Representative
Member
PFIs
Representative
Member
JICA
Representative
Observer
Financial Institutions Division
Additional Secretary
Member
Bangladesh Bank
Project
Director
of
JICA-PIU
Member Secretary
Economic Relations Division
Joint Secretary
Member
10
Financial Institutions Division
Deputy Secretary
Member


Bangladesh Bank
(Central Bank of Bank)
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh

--- Page 2 ---
SME & Special Programmes Department
JICA-PIU (UBSP)

Following Clause 1.3.7 will be added immediate after the clause 1.3.6, as:

1.3.7 Project Implementation Committee (PIC) for UBSP Component 1
For the purpose of the smooth operation of TSL Project, Project Implementation Committee (PIC) under
Component-1 of UBSP will be formed consisting 3(three) representatives BB-PIU and PWD-PIU
respectively. PIC will meet on monthly basis.

2.2 Financial and technical Procedures for the End-borrower
Clause 2.2(1) will be replaced by
(1) Eligible Applicants:
Eligible applicant is a person who meets following conditions;
a) An owner of building and factory, rented factory owner or building owner of RMG and Knitwear
sectors who holds/is willing to hold a membership of BGMEA, BKMEA, BGAPMEA or other
private building owner who is approved by PMC 1, and who is ready to carry out the initial
assessment and subsequent construction works retrofitting, rebuilding or relocation of his factory.

b) Ongoing construction work (Retrofitting, Rebuilding and Relocation will be considered to be
financed under UBSP scheme.

(Note: Condition of determining construction methods is described in Technical Guidance for the
TSL Project as ANNEX-XII)

2.2 Financial and technical Procedures for the End-borrower
Following Clause 2.2(8) will be added immediate after the clause 2.2(7), as:
(8) The end borrower will reasonably consider the size of new building (“sub project”) regardless of the
size of existing building in case of rebuilding/relocation.

--- Page 3 ---
SME & Special Programmes Department
JICA-PIU (UBSP)

2.2 Financial and Technical Procedures for the End-borrower
Table 2.1: Financial and Technical Procedure will be replaced by the following Table

Financial and Technical Procedures for End Borrowers





























Application with all
legal documents
Selection of eligible applicants by
PFIs with detail credit
assessmentand finalize the
eligibility with credit risk
assessment (maximum 15 days)
Initial assessment by
UBSP consultants
with rough cost
estimation (maximum
2 months)
Negotiation with
end borrowers by
PFIs (max 10
days)
Detail assessment and final
cost estimation by UBSP
consultants. (max 1 month)
Loan sanction
by PFIs (max 1
month)
BB will disburse
pre-finance or
refinance (max 10
Days)

Intermediary progress report from
UBSP consultant and/or PWD
enlisted contractor employed by
the owner
Fig: Financial and Technical Procedure

--- Page 4 ---
SME & Special Programmes Department
JICA-PIU (UBSP)



ANNEX-XII: Technical Guidance for the TSL Project under UBSP
At the end of ANNEX-XII, following paragraph will be added as:
Ongoing sub project
Sub projects for ongoing construction work (Retrofitting, Rebuilding and Relocation) will be considered
for financing under UBSP scheme. In this case, the progress report will be commenced by the contractor
employed by the end borrower or PWD-PIU consultants and PFI will recommend on the report. Then
JICA-PIU will consider financing on the basis of PWD-PIU and PFI’s recommendation.

All other clauses of the Operating Guidelines will remain unchanged.



Sincerely Yours



Md. Sharafat Ullah Khan
Project Director & Deputy General Manager
Phone: 9530331