--- Page 1 ---
বাং ব্যাংক জে ম্যানেজমেন্ট ডিগটমন্


ATT কার্যালয়

মতিঝিল, ঢাকা-১০০০
বাংলাদেশ

পরিপত্র নং-ডিএমডি-০৩/২০১৩ ১৫/০৪/২০১৩

সকল তফসিলী ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠান

"Issuance of Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds" শীর্ষক প্রজ্ঞাপন সংশোধন প্রসংগে ।

বাংলাদেশ সরকার ট্রেজারি বন্ড ইস্যু সংক্রান্ত ২৪/০৬/২০০৭ তারিখের অর্থ মন্ত্রণালয়ের Issuance of

Bangladesh Government Tresury Bonds শীর্ষক প্রজ্ঞাপনটি সংশোধনপূর্বক ২ বছর মেয়াদি ট্রেজারি বন্ড চালুকরণ,

রি-ইস্যুয়েস পদ্ধতি প্রচলন, বাংলাদেশে নিবাসীদের কাছে অনিবাসীর ধারণকৃত ট্রেজারি বন্ড এক বছরের মধ্যে বিক্রয় না করার

শর্ত প্রত্যাহার এবং অনলাইনে ট্রেজারি বন্ডের বিড দাখিলের সিদ্ধান্ত জ্ঞাপন করেছে । সিদ্ধান্তগুলো অবিলষে কার্যকর হবে ।

এতদসংক্রান্ত সরকারি প্রজ্ঞাপনের কপি সংযুক্ত হলো |

অনুগ্রহপূর্বক প্রাপ্তি স্বীকার করবেন |
আপনাদের বিশ্বস্ত,
সংযুক্তি ৫ বর্ণনা cies | XS ২৬৭
(এ এফ এম শাহীনুল ইসলাম)
উপ-মহাব্যবস্থাপক

ফোন 8 ৯৫৩০২০৯

--- Page 2 ---
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Ministry of Finance, Finance Division
Treasury and Debt Management Wing

Debt management-1 Section

Notification Number: 07.136.006.01.02.005.2013- 193 Date: 11 April, 2013

NOTIFICATION

Issuance and Re-issuance of Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds

In pursuance of Rule-4 of the Public Debt Rules 1946, the Finance Division issued a
notification vide No. MF/FD/RDMS-1/Policy & Organization-3/2006/147 on June 24, 2007.
The Government has now decided to make the following amendments to the notification as
under which shall take immediate effect:



The caption of the Notification shall stand modified as "Issuance and Re-issuance
of Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds."

The opening sentence in paragraph | shall stand amended to read as under :

"The Government has decided to issue Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds
in pursuance of Rule-4 of the Public Debt Rules 1946 with maturity of 2, 5, 10, 15
and 20 years."

The definition of BGTB in paragraph 1(a) shall stand amended to read as under :

"'BGTB' means a Bangladesh Government Treasury Bond with maturity of 2, 5,
10, 15 or 20 years, issued in accordance with the terms and conditions mentioned
in this notification."

. Paragraph 2(ii) (b) shall stand amended to read as under:

2(ii)(b) "The BGTB purchased by a non-resident may freely be resold to a
resident in Bangladesh or to another non-resident. Resale to a non-
resident shall be subject to the provision of paragraph 2(ii)(a)."

Paragraph 3(i) shall stand amended to read as under :

"BGTBs of 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, 15-year and 20-year maturity shall be
auctioned by the BB;"

The existing text of paragraph 4 will be renumbered as paragraph 4(a), followed
by a new paragraph 4(b) as under:

4 (b) Procedure of re-issuance of existing BGTBs for additional amounts by
auction

Government may from time to time reopen existing BGTBs for re-issuance of
additional amounts. Such re-issuance shall take place through auctions notified
at least one week prior to each auction;

Page 1 of 3

--- Page 3 ---
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)


(vi)

Re-issued bonds at face value shall have the same maturity date, coupon
payment dates and coupon rate as the original bonds. The bonds shall be
redeemed at face value;

The BGTBs shall be re-issued through multiple price based auction method. In
the re-issuance auctions the bidders may quote prices at premium, at par or at
discount at which they desire to purchase a bond of Taka 100 face value. Bids
shall be listed in descending order of prices and placed before the Auction
Committee; the Committee shall determine the price at which bids for BGTBs
shall be accepted in the auction;

Government's account with the BB shall be credited with the sale value of the
BGTBs re-issued. The premium on the re-issues shall be credited to the
Government account separately;

The accrued interest (if any) from the date of last coupon to the re-issue date
shall be realized from the successful bidders over and above the purchase price
of the re-issued BGTBs. The accrued interest shall be credited to a separate
Government Account;

All other terms and conditions applicable for BGTBs issued in primary
auctions shall also be applicable for the re-issued BGTBs.

G. Paragraph 4(a)(v) shall stand amended to read as under :

"Bids shall be received in sealed covers or in electronic form as specified by BB
from time to time upto 11.00 am on the auction date at the Public Debt Office at
BB, Motijheel Office. The bids shall be opened at 12 pm on the same day, listed
in ascending order of yields or in descending order of prices and placed before the
auction committee. The committee shall accept bids in ascending order of yields
or in descending order of prices upto the intended volume of issue. Between bids
at the same yield/price, those from the PDs shall have precedence over the others;
between non-PD bidders at the same yield/price, the volume accepted shall be
apportioned prorata." |

Other instructions laid down in the Notification dated 24 June, 2007 shall remain
unchanged.

Signed
11 April, 2013
A RM Nazmus Sakib
Additional Secretary
Treasury and Debt management Wing
Phone: 7169507, Fax: 7165581
Email: nsakib@finance.gov.bd

Page 2 of 3

--- Page 4 ---
Notification Number: 07.136.006.01.02.005.2013-193 Date: 11 April, 2013

Copy forwarded for kind information and necessary action:

25

Governor, Bangladesh Bank, Bangladesh Bank Head Office, Motijheel, Dhaka
Secretary, Finance Division, Ministry of Finance, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka
Additional Secretary (Budget and Debt management), Finance Division, Bangladesh
Secretariat, Dhaka

Deputy Governor-1 and Chairman of Auction Committee, Bangladesh Bank, Bangladesh
Bank Head Office, Motijheel, Dhaka

General Manager, Debt management Department, Bangladesh Bank, Bangladesh Bank
Head Office, Motijheel, Dhaka

Deputy Director, Government Printing Press, Tejgaon, Dhaka

(With a request to publish this notification in a special gazette and send 50 copies to the
undersigned)

Office copy

(Abu Daiyan Mohammad Ahsanullah)
Senior Assistant Secretary
Phone: 7163904, Fax: 7165581

Email: daiyanm@finance.gov.bd

Page 3 of 3