--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Operation Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
www.bb.org.bd.

SPA Circular No-3






Date: August 09, 2023

All Authorized Dealers of Foreign Exchange and
All Airlines/Shipping Companies/Licensed Freight Forwarders and
General Sales agents working in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,
Generation of “Information of freight charge on prepaid basis against export”& “Information of freight
charge against FOB (or similar term) import” by using Bangladesh Bank Online Export Monitoring
System (OEMS) & Bangladesh Bank Online Import Monitoring System (OIMS) respectively.


Please refer to Paragraph-1 (viii) (a) & (b) of Chapter-10 and appendix 5/13 of the Guidelines for Foreign
Exchange Transactions (GFET), 2018 regarding issuance of certificates by ADs in support of accepting freight in local
currency by Airlines/Shipping Companies for export and import. Currently ADs are issuing those certificates manually.
02. Now it has been decided that ADs shall generate-
a) "Information of freight charge on prepaid basis against export" (to be termed as Form FF- Export Prepaid) using
Bangladesh Bank Online Export Monitoring System (OEMS) as per instructions given in the User Manual (Freight
Forwarder- Import Collect Certificate management Guideline) of ‘Documents’ tab of OEMS instead of issuing certificate
manually as mentioned in Paragraph-1 (viii) (a) of Chapter-10 of GFET in favor of concerned Exporter.
b) "Information of freight charge against FOB (or similar term) import" (to be termed as Form FF- Import
Collect) using Bangladesh Bank Online Import Monitoring System (OIMS) as per instructions given in the User Manual
(Freight Forwarder- Import Collect Certificate management Guideline) of ‘Documents’ tab of OIMS instead of issuing
certificate manually as per appendix 5/13 of GFET in favor of concerned Importer.
03. Exporter/Importer shall provide ‘Form FF- Export Prepaid’/‘Form FF- Import Collect’ to the concerned
Freight Forwarders/ airlines/shipping companies in support of freight charges received in local currency.
04. In this regard, Freight Forwarders/Airlines/Shipping Companies shall collect ‘Form FF- Export Prepaid’ or
‘Form FF- Import Collect’ from the concerned Exporter/Importer in support of freight charges received in local currency
and submit the same to the designated AD while remitting their surplus earnings/Freight Charges to their Head Office/
Principal/Counterpart Freight Forwarder abroad.
05. Other instructions contained in Paragraph-1 (viii) (a) and (b) of Chapter-10 of GFET shall remain unchanged.
ADs are advised to bring the above instructions, effective immediately, to the notice of all constituents concerned.

Yours Faithfully

(Mohammad Zahir Hussain)
Director (FEOD)
Phone: 9530127