--- Page 1 ---
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh
website: www.bb.org.bd



Banking Regulation and Policy Department-1



08 March 2026
BRPD-1 Circular No. 06
Date: -----------------------

23 Falgun 1432
Managing Director/Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,
Guidance for banks in implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
Please refer to BRPD Circular Letter No. 03 dated 23 January 2025 on Implementation of ECL
based Classification and Provisioning under IFRS 9.
2. Bangladesh Bank (BB) devises a roadmap for the banks and provided preparatory instructions in
implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments by 2027 through the mentioned circular. The
roadmap was segregated in three phases and according to the road map, Bangladesh Bank is
needed to issue guidance for banks in implementing IFRS 9 at the beginning of the Phase II. As
per roadmap, Bangladesh Bank has prepared “Guidance for banks in implementing IFRS 9
Financial Instruments” and decided to issue it herewith.
3. According to the Bank Company Act, 1991 section 38, as a “Public Interest Entity” defined by
Financial Reporting Council (FRC), all the banks are needed to follow financial reporting
standards as per Financial Reporting Act, 2015. Moreover, according to the gazette published by
FRC in 02 November 2020, all the Public Interest Entity (PIE) must comply with the conceptual
framework for financial Reporting as well as International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)
as per section 44 of Financial Reporting Act, 2015.
4. The objective of this guidance is to ensure banks take steps to comply with the financial
reporting requirements outlined in IFRS 9. However, this Implementation Guidance is not
intended to cover all areas of IFRS 9. Instead, it focuses on critical areas of the accounting
standard. Thus, this guidance is considered to be the minimum requirements for implementing
IFRS 9 for banks. On the other hand, The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision issued
Guidance on credit risk and accounting for expected credit losses in December 2015. It is
recommended to the banks, to which this Implementation Guidance applies, to adopt the
principles contained therein.
5. This Implementation Guidance shall be applied to the funded and non-funded credit facilities by
January 2028. The application of this Guidance to all other financial instruments under IFRS 9,
such as investment securities, shall be adopted by January 2029. Bangladesh Bank will issue
directives (e.g. on CIB reporting, additional reporting template etc.) time to time as deemed
necessary.

--- Page 2 ---
6. Bangladesh Bank will provide guidance and clarification to banks during the implementation of
their IFRS 9 frameworks in accordance with this Implementation Guidance. Banks should
correspond exclusively from a dedicated official email.
7. This directive has been issued by Bangladesh Bank in exercise of its power conferred on it under
section 49(1)(cha) of the Bank Company Act, 1991.

Annex: as described.
Yours faithfully,

(Gazi Md. Mahfuzul Islam)
Director (BRPD-1)
Phone: 9530252

--- Page 3 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments

GUIDANCE FOR BANKS IN IMPLEMENTING
IFRS 9 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS


Banking Regulation and Policy Department-1
Bangladesh Bank
March, 2026

--- Page 4 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments























[This page kept blank intentionally]

--- Page 5 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments



GUIDANCE FOR BANKS IN IMPLEMENTING
IFRS 9 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS














Banking Regulation and Policy Department-1
Bangladesh Bank

--- Page 6 ---
Message from the Governor
Bangladesh Bank

The global financial system is undergoing a period of structural transformation shaped by post-
crisis regulatory reforms, evolving risk landscapes, technological change, and increasing
economic interdependence. In this environment, financial stability is no longer sustained by
capital adequacy alone; it depends equally on transparency, credibility of financial reporting, and
the integrity of risk recognition frameworks.

International Financial Reporting Standard 9 (IFRS 9) represents a cornerstone of this global
reform architecture. By replacing backward-looking loss recognition with a forward-looking
Expected Credit Loss (ECL) framework, IFRS 9 aligns financial reporting with modern risk
governance, macro prudential oversight, and sustainable financial intermediation. Its adoption
across jurisdictions reflects a shared international commitment to resilience, discipline, and
systemic stability.

For Bangladesh, the implementation of IFRS 9 is an integral part of our long-term vision for
building a sound, internationally aligned, and future-ready financial system. As Bangladesh
continues its transition toward a more diversified, investment-driven and globally connected
economy, the strength and credibility of its banking sector will remain foundational to national
development.

This Implementation Guidance reflects Bangladesh Bank’s strategic commitment to aligning
domestic financial architecture with international standards, while ensuring that reforms are
implemented in a manner consistent with national priorities, institutional capacity, and financial
system stability. The objective is not symbolic compliance, but the creation of a resilient banking
system capable of supporting sustainable growth, mobilizing capital efficiently, and maintaining
confidence among domestic and international stakeholders.

I would like to acknowledge the dedicated efforts of the inter-departmental committee, technical
experts, and stakeholders whose rigorous analytical work, consultation, and professional
judgment have contributed to the development of this Guidance. Their contribution has been
instrumental in ensuring that this framework is both technically sound and institutionally
practicable.

Bangladesh Bank will continue to provide strategic leadership to ensure that the implementation
of IFRS 9 strengthens the foundations of financial stability, supports long-term economic
transformation, and positions Bangladesh’s banking sector as a credible and trusted participant in
the global financial system.

J Se —

Md Mostaqur Rahman FCMA
Governor
Bangladesh Bank

Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments

--- Page 7 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments

Message from the Deputy Governor
Bangladesh Bank
Bangladesh‟s economy is currently navigating a phase of macroeconomic stabilization supported
by policy reform, structural reform and legal reform in the financial sector with a view to
bringing more discipline, ensuring good governance and fostering financial stability of the
country. Adoption of international best practices and risk-based supervisory framework in
banking sector has become an integral part of these initiatives.
In this context, Bangladesh Bank (BB) has planned to implement an Expected Credit Loss
(ECL)-based provisioning system for banks in accordance with the International Financial
Reporting Standard (IFRS 9). At present, banks follow a rule-based loan classification and
provisioning system. As part of our ongoing efforts to strengthen the risk management
capabilities of banks and enhance the transparency of financial reporting, Bangladesh Bank has
decided to adopt an ECL-based loan classification and provisioning framework under IFRS 9.
The ECL framework enables earlier risk identification, stronger provisioning discipline,
improved asset quality assessment, and greater credibility of bank balance sheets. These
outcomes extend beyond accounting improvements; they support stronger capital planning,
improved risk pricing, better credit allocation, and enhanced depositor and investor confidence.
At the institutional level, IFRS 9 will strengthen internal governance, reinforce risk culture, and
integrate credit risk assessment more effectively into business and management decisions. At the
system level, it will improve transparency, comparability, and supervisory effectiveness. At the
market level, it will contribute to strengthening confidence, improving financial intermediation,
and reinforcing financial stability.
I would like to recognize the extensive work of the IFRS 9 Implementation Team and the
subject-matter specialists who contributed to the development of this Guidance. Their sustained
engagement, technical rigor, and cross-institutional coordination have ensured that the
framework is both operationally practical and aligned with supervisory objectives.
Bangladesh Bank will continue to support banks throughout this transition through regulatory
guidance, supervisory engagement, and coordinated implementation efforts. The successful
adoption of IFRS 9 will represent not only regulatory compliance but also a meaningful
advancement in the quality, resilience, and credibility of Bangladesh‟s banking system.


(Dr. Md. Kabir Ahmed)
Deputy Governor
Bangladesh Bank

--- Page 8 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments

Preamble
International Financial Reporting Standard 9 (IFRS 9) was introduced as part of the global post-
crisis reform agenda to address structural weaknesses in financial reporting arising from delayed
recognition of credit losses and insufficient forward-looking risk assessment. The standard
replaces the incurred loss model with a forward-looking Expected Credit Loss (ECL) framework,
requiring earlier recognition of credit risk and more prudent provisioning practices.
As Public Interest Entities (PIEs) under the Financial Reporting Act, 2015, banks in Bangladesh
are required to comply with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) in accordance
with the directives issued by the Financial Reporting Council (FRC). The implementation of
IFRS 9 therefore constitutes both a statutory obligation and a regulatory requirement for the
banking sector.
Bangladesh Bank has adopted a phased implementation roadmap for IFRS 9 to ensure
institutional readiness, operational stability, and system-wide consistency. This Implementation
Guidance has been issued as part of that roadmap to provide regulatory direction, supervisory
structure, and implementation benchmarks for banks in applying the requirements of IFRS 9,
with particular focus on the Expected Credit Loss (ECL) framework.
Bangladesh Bank acknowledges the valuable contributions of the members of the IFRS 9
Implementation Team, whose analytical work, professional judgment, and sustained engagement
formed the foundation of this Guidance. The Bank also recognizes the contributions of former
committee members, Mr. Mohammad Shahriar Siddiqui, Director (FSD), and Mr.
Shakhawat Hossain, Joint Director, Bangladesh Bank, whose early engagement and technical
inputs supported the development of this framework. Bangladesh Bank further acknowledges the
International Finance Corporation (IFC) for its technical assistance in the development of this
Guidance. The Bank also appreciates the constructive contributions of Financial Reporting
Council (FRC) and the representatives of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
Bangladesh (ICAB)—Mr. Mohammad Abdul Ohab Miah, FCA, and Mr. Sk. Ashik Iqbal,
FCA, whose professional insights and consultative support helped strengthen the accounting
integrity and practical applicability of the framework.
This Guidance is intended to support consistent, proportionate, and credible implementation
across the banking sector. It focuses on critical areas necessary for effective adoption, while
allowing banks to exercise professional judgment and apply sound risk management practices in
line with international standards and supervisory expectations.

--- Page 9 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments

GUIDANCE FOR BANKS IN IMPLEMENTING
IFRS 9 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Advisor:
Md. Ashraful Alam, Executive Director, Bangladesh Bank
Implementation Team:

Chairperson:
Md. Bayazid Sarkar
Director (BRPD-1), Banking Regulation and Policy Department-1, Bangladesh Bank
Focal Point:
Mohammad Salauddin Tapadar
Additional Director, BRPD-1, Bangladesh Bank
Member Secretary:
Kazi Mahmudur Reza
Joint Director, BRPD-1, Bangladesh Bank
Members:
Mohammad Abdullah Al Masum
Additional Director, BSD-9, Bangladesh Bank
Golam Mostafa
Additional Director, BRPD-2, Bangladesh Bank
Mohammad Hasib Ur Rahman
Additional Director, BRPD-1, Bangladesh Bank
Nazia Haque, CFA
Joint Director, BRPD-1, Bangladesh Bank
Md. Majedul Islam
Joint Director, SPCD, Bangladesh Bank
Muhammad Hasan Tareq
Joint Director, BRPD-1, Bangladesh Bank
Rony Nath
Deputy Director, BRPD-1, Bangladesh Bank
Md. Abdul Auwal
Deputy Director, BRPD-1, Bangladesh Bank
Ahmed Rashid Joy
AMD & CRO, Brac Bank PLC
10. Mohammad Monowar Hossain FCA
Financial Controller, Standard Chartered Bank
11. Anik Kumar Mallick
Standard Setting Officer, Financial Reporting Council

--- Page 10 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments

GUIDANCE FOR BANKS IN IMPLEMENTING
IFRS 9 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Table of Contents

1. Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 1
2. Objectives of the Implementation Guidance: ............................................................................. 2
3. IFRS 9 Implementation Governance .......................................................................................... 2
4. ECL Framework ........................................................................................................................... 6
5. ECL Measurement Framework................................................................................................. 12
6. ECL Model Validation Framework .......................................................................................... 15
7. Interest Recognition .................................................................................................................... 17
8. Disclosure Requirements ............................................................................................................ 17
9. Temporary Treatment of Differences between ECL Allowance and Regulatory Provision 17
10. Transitional Arrangements ........................................................................................................ 18
Annexes .............................................................................................................................................. 20

--- Page 11 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
Page 1 of 29

1. Introduction
1.1 According to the section 38 of Bank Company Act, 1991 and section 44 of Financial
Reporting Act, 2015, as a “Public Interest Entity”, all the scheduled banks must comply
with the conceptual framework for financial reporting as well as International Financial
Reporting Standards (IFRS).

1.2 This guidance is the minimum requirements for implementing IFRS 9 Financial
Instruments for scheduled banks. This Implementation Guidance is not intended to
cover all areas of IFRS 9. Instead, it focuses on critical areas of the accounting
standard that are fundamental tobanks‟effective credit risk management, model
development and model risk management, and compliance risk management. This
implementation Guidance is not intended to replace IFRS 9 but is intended to
complement it.

1.3 This Implementation Guidance shall be applied to the funded and non-funded credit
facilities by January 2028. The application of this Guidance to all other financial
instruments under IFRS 9, such as investment securities, shall be adopted by January
2029.

1.4 IFRS 9 became effective for accounting periods beginning on or after January 1, 2018.
The standard outlines the recognition, measurement, and financial reporting
requirements for financial instruments, namely, financial instruments measured at
amortized cost (e.g. loans and investment securities) or fair value through other
comprehensive income (e.g. investment securities), accounts receivable, and off-
balance sheet credit exposures (e.g. undrawn loan commitments and unused lines of
credit) to which the standard apply.

1.5 IFRS 9 uses an expected credit loss (ECL) approach in estimating allowances for credit
losses for financial instruments. Expected credit losses are the results of financial
models driven by data and experienced credit judgment both of which are integrated
with forward-looking analysis. As prerequisites, banks are required to have access to
appropriate, relevant, and timely data; experienced credit judgement; and integrable and
justifiable forward-looking analysis.

1.6 The appropriateness of banks‟ credit risk management infrastructure will influence the
adequacy of their ECL estimates. As such, the frameworks for implementing IFRS 9
must be preceded by strong credit risk management infrastructures. Such infrastructures
should comprise equally effective credit risk assessment, identification, and rating
methodologies, credit risk classification and monitoring systems, timely identifiable
and executable delinquency management and write off directives, and meaningful
collateral valuation and recovery solutions.

1.7 The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision issued Guidance on Credit Risk and
Accounting for Expected Credit Losses in December 2015. The Guidance provides
sound principles for banks to adopt in establishing a comprehensive and effective

--- Page 12 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
Page 2 of 29

framework for appropriately accounting for their credit exposures and estimating ECL.
Accordingly, the Supervisor recommends banks, to which this Implementation
Guidance
applies,
to
adopt
the
principles
contained
therein
(https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/ d350.pdf provides access to this Guidance).

1.8 The Supervisor recognizes that there are differences in the nature, size, and complexity
of credit exposures and credit risk across banks. As such, the Supervisor recognizes
proportionality and anticipates that the methodologies adopted by banks in
implementing the requirements of IFRS 9 are commensurate and consistent with the
nature, size, and complexity of their credit risk exposures.

1.9 In case of foreign banks operating in Bangladesh, the ECL framework, including
governance, followed by Head Office/Group may continue to apply at Branch level.
However, the application of the framework at the Branch must be performed in the
Bangladesh context and a local team headed by a key management retains local
ownership of the framework and will be held accountable for the minimum standards
established in this Implementation Guidance by Bangladesh Bank.

2. Objectives of the Implementation Guidance:
The objectives of this Implementation Guidance are to:
a) Ensure banks take steps to comply with the financial reporting requirements outlined in
IFRS 9.
b) Promote transparency, consistency, uniformity, and comparability when reporting
financial instruments and estimating their expected credit losses for financial reporting
purposes.
c) Direct banks to the areas of their credit risk management frameworks that likely require
enhancements in identifying, measuring, monitoring, controlling, and reporting credit
risk exposures.
d) Equip banks with minimum tools necessary to ensure that they develop and implement
effective model management frameworks for estimating expected credit losses (ECLs).
e) Complement IFRS 9 by providing supervisory guidance on areas of the accounting
standards that are otherwise unspecified, undefined or require management to utilize
significant discretion or judgment.

3. IFRS 9 Implementation Governance
3.1 Every bank must have a documented ECL framework that is approved by the board of
directors, and subject to periodic review and updates. Reviews and updates to the
framework must be conducted at least annually or more frequently when the need
arises.

3.2 The documented framework should detail the bank‟s approach to implementing the
requirements of IFRS 9 and the Implementation Guidance. The minimum requirements

--- Page 13 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
Page 3 of 29

of the documented ECL framework are covered specifically in Section 4 of this
Implementation Guidance but are also indicated in other areas.

3.3 There are multiple stakeholders who must play their roles in developing and
maintaining effective implementation of the requirements of IFRS 9. These
stakeholders are components of banks‟ governance frameworks. The board of directors
and senior management hold ultimate responsibility for ensuring that the institution‟s
ECL framework is sound, forward-looking, and compliant with regulatory and
accounting standards. The objective is to ensure that ECL estimates are prudent,
unbiased, and based on high quality credit risk data and practices consistent with
regulatory expectations.

3.4 Each bank shall maintain a comprehensive credit risk governance structure that
supports robust and consistent ECL estimation, including clear segregation of duties,
defined escalation lines, and independent model oversight. The governance structure
must be described in the documented ECL framework to facilitate their accountability
and should include the following, at a minimum. The roles described herein for
governance stakeholders are not intended to be exhaustive. Banks are expected to
establish additional responsibilities, when required.

3.4.1 Board of Directors

Board of directors is responsible for:

Overall oversight of the credit risk and ECL governance frameworks.
Periodically reviewing and approving and recommended enhancements to
credit risk management policies to ensure consistency with approved risk
appetite, IFRS 9, and regulatory expectations especially in the areas of credit
risk underwriting, assessment, classification and rating, forbearance, ECL
methodologies, write offs and recoveries, and collateral valuation.
Periodically reviewing and approving a dynamic ECL methodology for
estimating ECL, consistent with IFRS 9 and this Implementation Guidance.
Reviewing and interrogating ECL estimates.
Interrogating and approving, where required, management overlays used in
estimating ECL.
Ensuring clear segregation of duties among risk management, finance, and
internal audit, and require independence of model development, validation,
and control functions.
Reviewing the results of model performance and validation assessments and
pursuing effective and timely resolutions of identified weaknesses, including
weaknesses identified by internal and external audit, and Bangladesh Bank.
Ensuring that the bank maintains sufficient human expertise, information
systems, and data infrastructure to support reliable ECL estimation and
governance.

--- Page 14 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
Page 4 of 29

3.4.2 Senior Management

Senior Management is responsible for:

Recommending and implementing board approved enhancements to credit
risk management policies to ensure consistency with approved risk appetite,
IFRS 9, and regulatory expectations especially in the areas of credit risk
underwriting, assessment, classification and rating, forbearance, ECL
methodologies, write offs and recoveries, and collateral valuation etc.
Developing, documenting, recommending, and implementing the board
approved ECL methodology for estimating ECL, consistent with IFRS 9 and
this Implementation Guidance, and translating it into detailed policies,
procedures, and control structures.
Developing and implementing a sound control environment with adequate
systems and procedures, to ensure that ECL estimates aretimely, unbiased,
reasonable, and appropriate.
Timely reporting of ECL estimates and other aspects of the bank‟s ECL
framework to the board of directors and assessing and applying overlays
based on experienced credit judgment, where required.
Taking steps to ensure that the performance of ECL models are periodically
tested and validated, and models are recalibrated periodically or when
required.
Timely and effectively resolving weaknesses identified from model
performance tests, validation, internal and external audit, and Bangladesh
Bank relating to the ECL framework.
Ensuring that organizational resources used in estimating ECL are adequate
and appropriate including ensuring that ECL estimates are conducted by
well-trained and competent personnel whether the estimates are performed
internally or outsourced, and technology and data infrastructure are robust.
Ensuring that data governance policies clearly define data ownership, access
and usage, quality controls and reconciliation procedures.
Promoting close coordination among risk management, finance, business,
and internal-audit functions to ensure consistency of assumptions and data
used in ECL estimation while preserving independence of model
development and validation team.
Providing/organizing training for relevant members of staff who will be
involved in the ECL model framework and taking steps to ensure that
relevant staff involved in credit and credit risk management are informed of
changes in credit risk management policies and practices resulting from
implementing IFRS 9 and this Implementation Guidance.

3.4.3 Risk Management

Risk Management functions (for example, enterprise-wide risk management,
credit risk management, and/or support functions such as finance, compliance,
etc.) should ensure that the ECL framework accurately reflects the bank‟s
creditrisk profile and operates in accordance with sound risk-management

--- Page 15 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
Page 5 of 29

principles. It should provide independent oversight, challenge, and assurance over
all components of the ECL process and is responsible for:

Interrogating the robustness of the ECL methodology and practices, and
adequacy of the ECL estimate. Risk management, as a control function, is
expected to be independent in the performance of its role. Therefore, risk
management should be involved in the interrogation of ECL methodologies
and practices. However, if it was involved in the development of the
framework, as this would impair its independent assessment, then the
interrogation function must be delegated to another control function that was
not involved in the development of the ECL framework.The control function
with this responsibility should have sufficient stature, authority, and
resources to challenge decisions that could materially affect the bank‟s risk
profile or the prudence of its ECL estimates. The risk function should have
direct and unfettered access to all relevant data, models, systems, and staff
necessary to carry out these responsibilities.
Recommending enhancements to credit risk management policies to ensure
consistency with IFRS 9 and supervisory expectations especially in the areas
of credit risk underwriting, assessment, classification and rating,
forbearance, ECL methodologies, write offs, and collateral valuation.
Reviewing and pursuing the results of model performance tests and model
validation exercises, internal and external audits, and Bangladesh Bank‟s
supervisory reviews, especially when these results materially impact the risk
of the bank.
Establishing processes for monitoring creditrisk trends, portfolio quality,
and drivers of changes in ECL. It should prepare independent risk reports to
senior management and the board of directors highlighting credit exposures,
concentrations, deteriorating sectors, and deviations from board-approved
risk appetite of the Bank. These reports should include commentary on
forward-looking information and stress-testing results relevant to ECL
sensitivity.
Maintaining adequate risk modeling capacity including expertise and
analytical capabilities to fulfill its responsibilities. Personnel engaged in
ECL oversight should possess skills in creditrisk modeling, portfolio
analytics, stress testing, and regulatory interpretation. Training programs
should be conducted regularly to sustain technical competence.

3.4.4 Internal Auditors

Internal auditors are responsible for:

Reviewing the reasonableness, appropriateness, and compliance of the
documented ECL methodology, practices, and estimates with IFRS 9 and
this Implementation Guidance considering the robustness of the control
environment and the ECL framework.
Identifying, measuring, monitoring, testing and reporting on control
weaknesses in credit risk management processes relating to credit risk

--- Page 16 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
Page 6 of 29

identification,
assessment,
measurement
and
rating,
classification,
provisioning, recovery, collateral enforcement, and write offs.
Reviewing the results ofmodel performance tests, model validation exercise,
andpursuing and evaluating the timely resolution of identified weaknesses
including weaknesses identified by external audit and Bangladesh Bank.
Reporting to the board of directors (or its delegated committee) on the
findings of internal audit of ECL framework highlighting material
weaknesses and recommended corrective actions.
Maintaining competent organizational resources (e.g., human and
informational technology capacity) to effectively execute its oversight
responsibilities.

3.4.5 External Auditors

External auditors are responsible for continuing to comply with the requirements
of Section 39 of the Bank-Company Act, 1991, and Rules for External Audit of
Bank Companies, 2024 and other applicable directives issued by Bangladesh
Bank.

4. ECL Framework
4.1 Banks should develop, document, and implement a board approved ECL framework.
The framework can be documented separately or can be incorporated into the existing
credit risk management policies. Where the framework is documented separately, it
must be referenced in the entity‟s credit risk management policies.

4.2 An initial copy of the board approved ECL framework must be submitted to the
Bangladesh Bank no later than July 15, 2026.

4.3 The ECL framework must be reviewed and updated periodically (at least annually and
more frequently where required).

4.4 Periodic Board-approved updates to the ECL framework must be submitted to the
Bangladesh Bank within 60 days of the period-end. Besides, any updates made in
between the period have to be submitted within 30 days of the updates.

4.5 The following, at a minimum, should be clearly articulated in the documented ECL
framework:

4.5.1 Definition of Default

Definition of Default should consider both quantitative and qualitative criteria.
Declassification of exposures by order of any competent authority does not affect
the credit risk classification of exposures under IFRS 9. The definition of default
is critical to staging and upgrading exposures. This definition is applicable solely
for credit risk classification purposes under IFRS 9.

--- Page 17 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
Page 7 of 29

Quantitative Criteria

i. Credit exposures that are 90 days or more past due or credit impaired.

ii. In case of the continuous loans, when repayments are inadequate to cover
interest capitalized for 90 days or more, they have exceeded their
approved limitsfor 90 days or more, or their limits have expired for 90
days or more.

Subjective Criteria

Credit exposures for which credit assessments of their likelihood of full
repayment are doubtful. Indicators of such likelihood of full repayment
based on the bank‟s credit experience and experienced credit judgement
should be documented in the ECL framework. Annex A specifies indicators
of unlikeliness to pay which are useful to banks in identifying default. Such
documented indicators are not intended to be exhaustive.

4.5.2 Criteria for Staging and Upgrading Credit Exposures

Criteria for staging and upgrading credit exposures determine how exposures are
classified for estimating ECL. Staging exposures is critical in determining
whether to establish 12-month ECL (Stage 1 exposures) or Lifetime ECL (Stages
2 and 3 exposures).

Staging Credit Exposures

IFRS 9 requires credit exposures to be classified into 3 stages. Criteria of
staging are as follows:

Stage 1 comprises credit exposures which do not exhibit significant
increase in credit risk since initial recognition. Banks may elect to utilize
the high-quality assets practical expedient provided in the accounting
standard. This election however can only apply to assets that satisfy the
eligibility requirements specified in the standard.

ii.
Stage 2 comprises credit exposures which exhibit significant increase in
credit risk since initial recognition.Credit exposures on which the bank is
unable to evaluate whether there is significant increase in credit risk
should be classified in Stage 2 unless they qualify as high-quality assets
under IFRS 9. Banks must document the justification that these assets are
high quality assets as defined in the standards. This assessment must be
available for supervisory review.

iii.
Stage 3 comprises credit exposures which are in default based on the
definition in Section 4.5.1 or are credit impaired.

--- Page 18 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
Page 8 of 29

iv.
The documented ECL framework should specify the criteria for
classifying exposures into each of the 3 stages and should also show a
clear and direct alignment between the accounting staging requirements
and the bank‟s internal credit risk ratings or external credit ratings. This
alignment will allow banks to plot the migration of exposures in their
credit rating systems with the migration of exposures in stages. It is
therefore important for banks to document, define, and periodically review
(at least annually or more frequently when required) their internal credit
risk rating methodology to ensure consistency with changes in borrower
and environmental credit risk characteristics.

Multiple exposures to the same borrower should be staged on an account-
by-account basis unless there are borrower specific factors that
demonstrate that all exposures should be categorized in the same stage.
For example, a borrower with multiple exposures of which one or more
exposures exhibit significant increase in credit risk or default would
suggest that there is likely a contagion effect on the remaining exposures.
The materiality of the exposure with significant increase in credit risk or
default, in relating to the group of exposures, will impact its contagion on
the remaining exposures. Therefore, banks should assess the likelihood of
such contagion effect and separate staging only when there is
demonstrative evidence that contagion is highly unlikely. For example, an
exposure may have a separate repayment source for which repayment is
likely or the exposure with significant increase in credit risk or default is
immaterial based on the total exposure to the borrower. The same
principle applies when the borrower has multiple exposures across several
banks of which one or more exposures exhibit significant increase in
credit risk or default. The bank should access the likelihood of such
contagion effect on its own exposure if it has information that the
borrower has one or more exposures in other banks that exhibit significant
increase in credit risk or default. Such information may be revealed in the
ongoing monitoring of an exposure through credit reference, bank
reference, or other means of credit reporting. Significant increase in credit
risk or default in one or more exposures in other banks may indicate a
worsening financial condition or financial distress of the borrower to
justify the bank to treat its exposure as having significant increase in credit
risk even if the exposure is performing. If the significant increase in credit
risk or default in one or more exposures in other banks are material and
indicate an unlikeliness that the borrower will pay the bank‟s existing
exposure then the bank should evaluate its exposure for credit impairment.

Upgrading Credit Exposures

It is not unusual for credit exposures to recover from adverse credit
conditions or experience improvements in their credit risk characteristics.
This recovery or improvement can result in an upgrade in staging
classification. Upgrading of credit facilities shall be in accordance with a

--- Page 19 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
Page 9 of 29

policy approved by the Board of Directors. Such upgradation shall be
carried out by a department that is independent from the credit facility
review mechanism.

ii.
Credit exposures that were previously credit impaired and classified as
Stage 3,and at the time of ECL estimationare no longer assessed as
impaired, may be upgraded to Stage 2, and credit exposures that were
previously classified as Stage 2 may be upgraded to Stage 1, if all the
following apply:
− All past due amounts have been repaid in full, and the exposure is no
longer past due (not because of concessions granted);
− The factors that initially contributed to deterioration in credit risk no
longer exists; and
− The exposure has been performing satisfactorily in accordance with
the terms and conditions of the underlying agreement for a continuous
period of90 days up to the time of the ECL estimation.

iii.
The assessments supporting upgrading credit exposures must be
documented, justifiable, and available for Supervisory review.

iv.
Multiple credit exposures to a single counterparty should be upgraded
when all credit exposures satisfy the requirements for upgrade.Banks may
upgrade parts of the total exposure only where there is justifiable evidence
to support upgrading those parts. This exception should be used only in
limited circumstances.

4.5.3 Criteria for Significant Increase in Credit Risk (SICR)

Criteria for SICR determine the migration of credit exposures from Stage 1
to Stage 2. The bank‟s criteria for determining SICR must be documented
in the ECL framework. Annex B outlines the minimum triggers for
significant increase in credit risk. Banks are expected to include their bank-
specific experiences.

The criteria should be reviewed and updated periodically (at least annually
or more frequently when required).

Additionally, banks should implement processes and controls to ensure
timely recognition and action at each reporting date, when SICR have
occurred. This determination makes a difference between evaluating 12-
month ECL (Stage 1) or Lifetime ECL (Stage 2) on credit exposures.

The documented criteria for SICR should be based on the bank‟s credit
experience and experienced credit judgment and comprise both quantitative
and qualitative criteria. The qualifying criteria should be like those utilized
by the bank to identify credit exposures that require heightened credit risk
monitoring or “watch list”. Banks should adjust the capacity of their credit

--- Page 20 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 10 of 29

risk monitoring systems to timely identify exposures that meet the criteria
for SICR. Such credit risk monitoring systems should have the capacity to
identify whether the presence of SICR in one exposure is indicative of
SICR in the related exposures.

IFRS 9 provides a rebuttable presumption that SICR occurs when payments
are 30 days or more past due. If a bank selects a quantitative criterion
greater than this backstop then the selection must be justified with relevant,
appropriate, and documented evidence to support the selection. This
exception should be used only in limited circumstances.

The criteria for SICR must be determined by the risk of default and not
based on the risk of loss. Therefore, the presence of credit risk mitigants
such as collateral does not mitigate the risk of default and should not be
taken into consideration when evaluating SICR unless the exposure is
collateral dependent.

4.5.4 Criteria for Credit Impairment

Criteria for Credit Impairment determine whether exposures are
categorized in Stage 3. The ECL framework should clearly define credit
impairment, outline the methodology for estimating credit impairment, and
identify triggers to cause the bank to test exposures for impairment. Such
triggers are like those described in Annex C – Objective Evidence of
Impairment. However, banks must develop their own criteria based on the
nature and complexity of their credit risk exposures and credit
environment, credit experience, and experienced credit judgement.

Credit impairment triggers must be reviewed and updated periodically (at
least annually or more frequently when required).

The presence of a trigger does not indicate the presence of credit
impairment. However, the presence of a trigger should lead to tests for
credit impairment. Results of such tests should be maintained for
supervisory review.

4.5.5 Definition and Treatment of Credit Forbearance

Definition and treatment of credit forbearance influence the credit risk
rating and classification or staging of forborne exposures. Credit
forbearance occurs when a bank changes the terms and conditions of an
existing credit agreement or substitutes an existing credit agreement with a
new credit agreement, because of the financial difficulty of the borrower.
The act of forbearance would not have been applied under normal
conditions and as such was implemented to ease the financial difficulty of
the affected borrower. The documented ECL framework should clearly
define credit forbearance and evidence of borrowers‟ financial difficulty

--- Page 21 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 11 of 29

that would cause the bank to extend forbearance. Changes in the terms and
conditions of an existing credit agreement or substitution of an existing
credit agreement with a new credit agreement for reasons other than the
financial difficulty of the borrower or deterioration in the borrower‟s credit
quality are not considered credit forbearance for the purposes of this
Implementation Guidance. Annex D outlines an indicative and non-
exhaustive definition of credit forbearance.

Stage 1 credit exposures which have been forborne should migrate to Stage
2, as the act of forbearance would be the result of SICR.

Stage 2 credit exposures which have been forborne should be evaluated for
impairment as if the forbearance did not occur. If the evaluations reveal
that these exposures would have been impaired, then they should migrate to
Stage 3. However, granting credit concessions to an entire class of financial
instruments, for reasons including economic shock, may not automatically
qualify as SICR or credit impairment to warrant staging migration. Such
circumstances would be determined based on the bank‟s experienced credit
judgement or tests for credit impairment.

Forborne exposures that were previously credit impaired and classified as
Stage 3, and at the time of ECL estimation are no longer assessed as
impaired under the revised terms and conditions, may be upgraded to Stage
2, and credit exposures that were previously classified as Stage 2 may be
upgraded to Stage 1, if all the following apply:
All past due amounts have been repaid in full, and the exposure is no
longer past due, if it was previously past due;
The factors that initially contributed to forbearance no longer exists;
and
The exposure has been performing satisfactorily (without any
additional forbearance) in accordance with the revised terms and
conditions for continuous 12 months up to the time of the ECL
estimation and this period begins after any grace period extended as
part of the forbearance has expired.

Banks should limit the number of credit forbearance that can be applied to
any exposure within a specified period as per Bangladesh Bank‟s
directives. This limitation must be documented in the ECL framework.

4.5.6 Criteria for Debt Write Off and Recovery

Criteria for Debt Write Off and Recovery should be explicitly documented in the
ECL framework or otherwise in a separate Debt Write Off and Recovery policy
embedded in the credit risk management policies following Bangladesh Banks
directives. The Debt Write Off and Recovery policy, if separate, must be
referenced in the documented ECL framework. Bank‟s debt write-off criteria
should be based on their credit experience and experienced credit judgment.

--- Page 22 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 12 of 29

A bank should write off financial instruments when it has no reasonable
expectations of recovering the contractual cash flows in entirety or portions
thereof. For example, a bank should write off 70% of an exposure to a financial
instrument if it intends to enforce the related collateral and expects to recover no
more than 30% and has no reasonable expectation to recover the remaining 70%.

4.5.7 ECL Measurement Framework

ECL Measurement Framework holistically describes the methodology for
measuring ECL. The measurement framework should adequately describe the
data and data requirements, model assumptions (and scenarios, if any), model
inputs including forward looking information, model design, ECL computational
framework, model output, model performance tests, model validation
requirements, and ECL reporting mechanisms. An effective internal control
environment must permeate the framework. Section 5 of this Implementation
Guidance provides more details on the minimum requirements for an effective
ECL measurement framework.

5. ECL Measurement Framework
5.1 Banks must adopt, document, and implement an appropriate ECL measurement
methodology that adequately reflects the nature, size, and risk complexity of their credit
portfolios. Accordingly, banks should engage a robust ECL model framework that will
produce adequate ECL estimates that appropriately reflect the expected credit losses of
their credit portfolios.

5.2 ECL estimates are the results of financial models adopted to estimate ECL on credit
portfolios. These models range from simple to more complex. However, the degree of
model complexity must be consistent and appropriate with the measurement framework
documented and proportionate to the size and complexity of the bank. The
appropriateness of a model should be considered as more important model
characteristic than complexity.

5.3 Financial models utilized to estimate ECL are extremely data sensitive. Therefore,
banks should evaluate their data collection, management, and storage capacity to ensure
that model data is accurate, adequate, and complete. Historical credit data should be
multi-year and multi-credit cycle to ensure it adequately captures likely credit risk
patterns, trends, and drivers. Banks shall use no less than 5 years of historical credit risk
data. Absent data can be substituted with appropriate and relevant proxies. Justification
for the choice of proxies must be well documented and available for supervisory
review. The use of proxies must be temporary until the bank collects the actual data.
Credit risk data must be updated and reviewed at least quarterly or when ECL
estimation occurs more frequently.

5.4 Banks may elect to internally develop, externally procure, or acquire from their
overseas parent company or Head Office, a financial model to estimate ECL.
Irrespective of the model design, consideration should be given to the extent to which

--- Page 23 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 13 of 29

the model can be integrated with bank‟s core banking systems especially for ease of
data extraction. If models are expected to be maintained separately, then consideration
must be given to the medium and controls for effective data extraction and transfer to
the financial models. Also, further consideration should be given to the flexibility of the
model and capacity to adapt to future changes in credit risk complexities and strategies.

5.4.1 Banks that elect to develop their financial models internally should ensure that
they possess the requisite competencies and expertise to develop such models.
If the expertise is outsourced to consultants, bank management shall remain
accountable to understanding and articulating the model methodology.

5.4.2 Banks that elect to externally procure financial models should ensure that such
models are customized based on the nature, complexity, and unique
characteristics of their credit risk data, credit portfolios, and credit
environments, and credit experience, and are therefore fit for purpose. These
banks should also ensure that they possess the requisite competencies and
expertise to facilitate effective model implementation. These minimum
requirements ensure that model estimates reflect the uniqueness of banks‟ credit
risk portfolios and credit experience. However, bank management shall be able
to understand and articulate the model methodology for procured financial
models.

5.4.3 Banks that adopt their financial models from their overseas parent company or
Head Office should ensure that such models are customized based on the nature,
complexity, and unique characteristics of the local Branches credit risk data,
credit portfolios, credit environments, and credit experience. These banks
should also ensure that they possess the requisite competencies, expertise, and
authority to interrogate model estimates and model frameworks. Nevertheless,
bank management shall be able to understand and articulate the model
methodology and be aware of model limitations.

5.5 There is no one-type fits all financial model for estimating ECL for all banks.
Therefore, the bank must select appropriate and relevant model inputs (for example
probability of default, loss given default, exposure at default, historical loss rates) that
must be clearly defined in its ECL framework. Additionally, the measurement
methodology for each input should also be clearly documented in the framework.

5.6 Model inputs may be subject to management overlays based on the bank‟s experienced
credit judgment. Management overlays, when utilized, must be reasonable, relevant,
and appropriate, and the justification supporting the use of overlays must be
documented for supervisory review. Overlays should be approved by the board of
directors. The definition of materiality and the criteria for overlays to be referred for
board approval should be documented in the ECL framework. The reasons for
management overlays should be integrated in future model inputs to minimize future
use and frequency of overlays.

--- Page 24 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 14 of 29

5.7 It is highly likely that ECL models will be driven by key assumptions which will be
integrated into model inputs. Model assumptions must be relevant, reasonable,
appropriate, and reflect the bank‟s experienced credit judgment. Model assumptions
should be unbiased and not overly optimistic or pessimistic. Model assumptions must
be documented in the ECL framework and subject to periodic review and update (at
least annually or more frequently when required).

5.8 Forward Looking Information (FLI)

5.8.1 Model inputs must reflect historical, current, and Forward-Looking Information
(FLI). Banks should utilize no less than 5 years of historical data.

5.8.2 FLIs should incorporate macroeconomic variables that are appropriate and
relevant in determining ECL of banks‟ credit portfolios. Banks should identify
and document FLIs that are incorporated in their ECL estimates. This
information can be derived internally or externally sourced.

5.8.3 Banks should document the methodology and provide evidence to support their
derivation of internally generated FLIs or externally sourced FLIs from credible
sources that are known to produce expert estimates.

5.8.4 Banks should avoid biased selection of sources from which the use of their FLIs
is for the sole purpose of underreporting their ECL estimates. As a result, any
change in information sources from one reporting period to the next must be
justified and documented for supervisory review.

5.8.5 Banks that internally derive their FLIs must have the competencies and
expertise to do so.

5.8.6 The relevance of selected FLIs should be assessed periodically (at least
quarterly or more frequently when required) to determine whether they remain
consistent influencers or credit risk drivers.

5.9 Banks using a probability weighted approach in determining their ECL estimates
should consider at least 3 scenarios (for example, worst case, normal, and best case).
Probability assessments and measurements must be well documented and subject to
supervisory review.

5.10 Banks may estimate ECL on groups of credit exposures. For such purposes, groups
must be formed based on common/shared credit risk characteristics. Such
characteristics must permeate the respective groups that are created such that changes
in those characteristics should affect the ECL estimate of the group. Such
characteristics may include collateral type, product type, customer type, market
segment, borrower characteristics, etc. Common/shared credit risk characteristics of
groups of credit exposures must be reviewed periodically (at least annually or more
frequently when required) to determine whether their presence remain as a common

--- Page 25 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 15 of 29

credit risk driver and the group remains relevant. Otherwise, the group of credit
exposures must be adjusted.

5.11 Banks are required to estimate ECL on a quarterly basis or more frequently when they
have the capacity to do so. ECL estimates may be subject to management overlays
based on its experienced credit judgment. Management overlays, when utilized, must
be reasonable, relevant, and appropriate, and their justifications must be documented
for supervisory review.

5.12 Model Performance Test

5.12.1 Banks should periodically evaluate the performance of their ECL models. Model
performance tests must be conducted at least annually or more frequently when
required.

5.12.2 The documented ECL frameworks should clearly describe the types of model
performance tests to be conducted and specify minimum benchmarks or standards
for test results.

5.12.3 The results of model performance tests should be shared with the board of
directors and timely actioned to ensure improved model performance. Model
results should be documented to facilitate tracking. The results of model
performance tests should also be available for supervisory review.

5.12.4 Banks may elect to adopt any model testing technique if this technique is
determined to be robust and consistent with the characteristics and complexity of
their ECL measurement frameworks.

5.12.5 There is no requirement for personnel performing model performance tests to be
independent of the model development, implementation, and estimation
processes.

5.12.6 The frequency, methodology, and reporting results of model performance tests
must be documented in the ECL framework.

6. ECL Model Validation Framework
6.1 Banks are required to validate their model frameworks at least annually or more
frequently when required. However, Banks must validate their model after initial model
development within 2027.

6.2 Model validation involves an independent review of the bank‟s entire model framework
to determine its robustness, comprehensiveness, and appropriateness to produce
adequate ECL estimates considering the nature, size, and complexity of its credit risk
exposures and credit risk experience.

--- Page 26 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 16 of 29

6.3 The validation process not only verifies that the model framework is fit for purpose, but
also that it is performing as intended, and is consistent with IFRS 9 and this
Implementation Guidance.

6.4 The scope for the validation process encompasses the breadth of the model framework
including the model data, assumptions, inputs, design, computation, output,
performance, governance, and controls.

6.5 The model validation process and methodology must be documented and updated
periodically (at least annually or more frequently when required).

6.6 Model validators must be competent and possess relevant professional experience and
expertise to perform the validation exercise.

6.7 Any engagement with model validators should clearly specify contractually that they
are also accountable to Bangladesh Bank in their validation function.

6.8 Model validators must not be involved in the development of the model.

6.9 Banks must notify Bangladesh Bank prior to the engagement of model validators to
determine whether Bangladesh Bank objects to the appointment. The notification must
be accompanied by evidence of the validator‟s competence and professional
experience.

6.10 The results of model validation exercises should be shared with the board of directors
and recommendations for improvements should be timely actioned to ensure the
adequacy of ECL estimates.

6.11 The results of the model validation exercise should also be submitted to Bangladesh
Bank by the model validators no later than 30 days after completing the exercise.

6.12 Banks will have an additional 30 days to submit an action plan to Bangladesh Bank to
remediate deficiencies identified or adopt the recommendations made by the model
validator.

6.13 Banks shall submit periodic progress reports which track its progress to satisfy the
agreed upon resolution deadline. The frequency or deadline for submission of progress
reports will be determined by Bangladesh Bank on a case-to-case basis depending on
the severity of the deficiencies.

6.14 The frequency and reporting of results of model validation exercises must be
documented in the ECL framework.

--- Page 27 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 17 of 29

7. Interest Recognition
Banks shall recognize interest on Stage 1 and Stage 2 exposures based on the interest revenue
calculated on the gross carrying amount (i.e. without deducting expected credit losses) on
Stage 1 and Stage 2 exposures. While, interest income on Stage 3 exposures shall be
calculated on the net carrying amount (i.e. after deducting expected credit losses on Stage 3
exposures.
8. Disclosure Requirements
8.1 Banks will be required to comply with disclosure requirements under IFRS 7 –
Financial Instruments: Disclosures.

8.2 Banks must submit a statement of changes of their opening and closing ECL allowance
balances at the end of each quarter, to Bangladesh Bank no later than 30 days after each
quarter.

8.3 The statement of changes must clearly illustrate the deterioration and up gradation of
credit exposures between stages, write off of uncollectible exposures, recovery of
written off uncollectible exposures, model adjustments, or any other factor that
contributed to the change in ECL allowance during the quarter. Reporting templates are
provided in Annex E.

8.4 Banks must submit a reconciliation of their ECL Allowance to their regulatory
provisions to clearly identify additional regulatory provisions. Additional regulatory
provisions must be calculated based on Section 9 of this Implementation Guidance.
Reporting templates are provided in Annex F.

8.5 Bangladesh Bank may specify other disclosure requirements from time to time.

9. Temporary Treatment of Differences between ECL Allowance and Regulatory
Provision
9.1 Banks should maintain the higher of IFRS 9 ECL allowance and regulatory provision
(estimated under BRPD Circular No. 15 Master Circular: Loan Classification and
Provisioning and its subsequent modifications) for loans and off-balance sheet credit
losses as follows, until advised otherwise by Bangladesh Bank:

If IFRS 9 ECL allowance is greater than regulatory provisions, then banks should
maintain their ECL allowance in accordance with IFRS 9.

ii.
If IFRS 9 ECL allowance is less than regulatory provisions, then banks should
maintain their ECL allowance in accordance with IFRS 9 and the additional
provisions needed to meet regulatory requirement should be included in a Loan
Loss Reserve account that is treated as a component of shareholders' equity.

--- Page 28 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 18 of 29

9.2 The Loan Loss Reserve is an equity account that is funded through the appropriation of
retained earnings. It should not be treated as an expense in the income statement. The
Loan Loss Reserve account should be maintained as a non-distributable reserve and as
such is not available for distribution as dividends to shareholders. Any reduction in the
Loan Loss Reserve account caused by a reduction in regulatory provisions should be
transferred to retained earnings and should not be reflected in the income statement.

9.3 Annex G provides an illustrative example of this treatment.

10. Transitional Arrangements

10.1 Calculation of Regulatory Capital
10.1.1 Banks may elect to use the following transitional arrangements to minimize the
Day 1 impact of adopting IFRS 9 ECL provisions on retained earnings and
ultimately Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) Capital.

10.1.2 Banks are permitted to adopt a static approach when adjusting the impact of
any unamortized DAY 1 IFRS 9 ECL provision on CET1 Capital due to the
impact on retained earnings. Banks shall amortize this impact of DAY 1 IFRS 9
ECL provisions on CET1 Capital over 5 years from the initial date of adopting
IFRS 9. As such, banks will add back any unamortized DAY 1 IFRS 9 ECL
provisions annually to their CET1 Capital based on the following:

Year
% of Impact to add back to
CET1 Capital
95%
85%
70%
50%
25%
6 & Onwards

10.1.3 Annex H provides an illustrative example.

10.1.4 Bank that elects to opt out of the transitional arrangements at the time of
adopting IFRS 9 will not be permitted to adopt such arrangements at a later
date.

10.2 Calculation of Credit Risk-weighted Assets

Since IFRS 9 does not distinguish between specific and general provisions, ECL
provisions on Stages 1 and 2 exposures should be treated as general provisions, and
ECL provisions on Stage 3 exposures should be treated as specific provisions, for
regulatory capital purposes. A bank‟s computation of credit risk weighted assets will
remain unchanged i.e., specific provisions netted against the exposure when
determining credit risk weighted assets and general provisions are in included in Tier 2
capital.

--- Page 29 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 19 of 29


10.3 Disclosure Requirements related to Regulatory Capital

10.3.1 Banks should disclose their regulatory capital components without the
transitional arrangements, and after the transitional adjustments. This permits a
comparison between regulatory capital components to demonstrate the effect of
the transitional arrangements.

10.3.2 Similarly, Banks should also calculate their capital adequacy metrics such as
CET1, Tier 1, Tier 1 Leverage, and Total Regulatory Capital ratios, based their
CET1 capital after the transitional adjustments. All related regulatory capital
decisions should be based CET1 capital after the transitional adjustments until
the transitional arrangements expire.

--- Page 30 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 20 of 29

ANNEXES

ANNEX A – INDICATORS OF UNLIKELINESS TO PAY
Paragraph 36.69 of the Basel Framework states that (any one of) the elements to be taken as
indications of unlikeliness to pay include:
1. The bank puts the credit obligation on non-accrued status.

2. The bank makes a charge-off or account-specific provision resulting from a significant
perceived decline in credit quality subsequent to the bank taking on the exposure.

3. The bank sells the credit obligation at a material credit-related economic loss.

4. The bank consents to a distressed restructuring of the credit obligation where this is likely to
result in a diminished financial obligation caused by the material forgiveness, or
postponement, of principal, interest or (where relevant) fees.

5. The bank has filed for the obligor‟s bankruptcy or a similar order in respect of the obligor‟s
credit obligation to the banking group.

6. The obligor has sought or has been placed in bankruptcy or similar protection where this
would avoid or delay repayment of the credit obligation to the banking group.

--- Page 31 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 21 of 29

ANNEX B – MINIMUM INDICATORS OF SIGNIFICANT INCREASE IN CREDIT RISK
1. Significant changes in internal price indicators of credit risk as a result of a change in
credit risk since inception.
2. Other changes in the rates or terms of an existing financial instrument that would be
significantly different if the instrument was newly originated or issued at the reporting
date (such as more stringent covenants, increased amounts of collateral or guarantees, or
higher income coverage) because of changes in the credit risk of the financial instrument
since initial recognition.
3. Significant changes in external market indicators of credit risk for a particular financial
instrument or similar financial instruments with the same expected life.
4. An actual or expected significant change in the financial instrument‟s external credit
rating.
5. An actual or expected internal credit rating downgrade for the borrower or decrease in
behavioural scoring used to assess credit risk internally. Internal credit ratings and
internal behavioural scoring are more reliable when they are mapped to external ratings
or supported by default studies.
6. Existing or forecast adverse changes in business, financial or economic conditions that
are expected to cause a significant change in the borrower‟s ability to meet its debt
obligations, such as an actual or expected increase in interest rates or an actual or
expected significant increase in unemployment rates.
7. An actual or expected significant change in the operating results of the borrower.
Examples include actual or expected declining revenues or margins, increasing operating
risks, working capital deficiencies, decreasing asset quality, increased balance sheet
leverage, liquidity, management problems or changes in the scope of business or
organizational structure (such as the discontinuance of a segment of the business) that
results in a significant change in the borrower‟s ability to meet its debt obligations.
8. Significant increases in credit risk on other financial instruments of the same borrower.
9. An actual or expected significant adverse change in the regulatory, economic, or
technological environment of the borrower that results in a significant change in the
borrower‟s ability to meet its debt obligations, such as a decline in the demand for the
borrower‟s sales product because of a shift in technology.
10. Significant changes in the value of the collateral supporting the obligation or in the
quality of third-party guarantees or credit enhancements, which are expected to reduce
the borrower‟s economic incentive to make scheduled contractual payments or to
otherwise have an effect on the probability of a default occurring.

--- Page 32 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 22 of 29

11. A significant change in the quality of the guarantee provided by a shareholder (or an
individual‟s parents) if the shareholder (or parents) have an incentive and financial ability
to prevent default by capital or cash infusion.
12. Significant changes, such as reductions in financial support from a parent entity or other
affiliate or an actual or expected significant change in the quality of credit enhancement,
that are expected to reduce the borrower‟s economic incentive to make scheduled
contractual payments.
13. Expected changes in the loan documentation including an expected breach of contract
that may lead to covenant waivers or amendments, interest payment holidays, interest rate
step-ups, requiring additional collateral or guarantees, or other changes to the contractual
framework of the instrument.
14. Significant changes in the expected performance and behaviour of the borrower,
including changes in the payment status of borrowers in the group (for example, an
increase in the expected number or extent of delayed contractual payments or significant
increases in the expected number of credit card borrowers who are expected to approach
or exceed their credit limit or who are expected to be paying the minimum monthly
amount).
15. Changes in the entity‟s credit management approach in relation to the financial
instrument; i.e. based on emerging indicators of changes in the credit risk of the financial
instrument, the entity‟s credit risk management practice is expected to become more
active or to be focused on managing the instrument, including the instrument becoming
more closely monitored or controlled, or the entity specifically intervening with the
borrower.
16. Past Due information including the rebuttable presumption.
17. A significant change in the geographical locations or natural catastrophes that directly
impact the performance of a customer/group of customers or an instrument.
18. The borrower is subject to litigation that significantly affects the performance of the
credit facility.
19. The borrower is deceased.
20. Bank is unable to contact or find the borrower.
21. Unavailable/inadequate financial information/financial statements.
22. If the credit facilities are not utilized properly.
23. Fund diversion.

--- Page 33 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 23 of 29

ANNEX C – OBJECTIVE EVIDENCE OF IMPAIRMENT

According to IAS 39 Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement objective
evidence of impairment refers to „observable data‟ regarding the impact of the occurrence of one
or more loss events on the estimated future cash flows of a financial instrument or group of
financial instruments. The impact on estimated future cash flows can be “reliably estimated”.
Banks may use their experienced credit judgement when estimating the impact of loss events on
future cash flows. This judgment does not minimize the reliability of the estimate if it is
justifiable. Loss events must occur after initial recognition of the financial instrument and should
not include future loss events despite their likelihood of occurrence. Loss events may include:
1. Significant financial difficulty of the borrower. A credit rating downgrade of a borrower
may not be considered evidence of impairment unless aggregated with other information;
2. A breach of contract, such as a default or delinquency in interest or principal payments;
3. Granting concession to the borrower due to its financial difficulty;
4. It becoming probable that the borrower will enter bankruptcy or other financial
reorganization; or
5. Observable data indicating that there is a measurable decrease in the estimated future
cash flows from a group of financial instruments since the initial recognition of those
instruments, although the decrease cannot yet be identified with the individual financial
instruments in the group, including:
Adverse changes in the payment status of borrowers in the group (for example, an
increased number of delayed payments or an increased number of credit card
borrowers who have reached their credit limit and are paying the minimum
monthly amount); or
ii.
National or local economic conditions that correlate with defaults on the financial
instruments in the group (for example, an increase in the unemployment rate in
the geographical area of the borrowers, a decrease in property prices for
mortgages in the relevant area, a decrease in oil prices for loan assets to oil
producers, or adverse changes in industry conditions that affect the borrowers in
the group).

--- Page 34 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 24 of 29

ANNEX D – DEFINITION OF CREDIT FORBEARANCE

According to the Basel Committing on Banking Supervision, credit forbearance occurs when:

a) A borrower is experiencing financial difficulty at the time the forbearance is to be granted;
and

b) A bank grants a concession that it would not otherwise consider. A concession refers to
any change in the conditions of an existing credit agreement by giving more favorable
terms to a borrower; granting a supplementary agreement or new contract to refinance the
current exposure; or allowing the borrower to exercise a contractual right to change any
term or condition of the existing agreement, obtain additional loans, or off-balance sheet
credits because of their financial difficulty.

Indicators of financial difficulty

The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision cites the following as examples of indicators of
financial difficulty:

1. A borrower is currently past due on any of its material exposures.
2. A borrower is not currently past due, but it is probable that the borrower will be past due
on any of its material exposures in the foreseeable future without the concession, for
instance, when there has been a pattern of delinquency in payments on its material
exposures.
3. A borrower‟s outstanding securities have been delisted, are in the process of being
delisted, or are under threat of being delisted from an exchange due to non-compliance
with the listing requirements or for financial reasons.
4. If, based on actual performance and estimated and projections of the borrower‟s current
capabilities, the bank forecasts that all the borrower‟s committed/available cash flows
will be insufficient to service all its loans or debt securities (both interest and principal) in
accordance with the contractual terms of the existing agreement for the foreseeable
future.
5. A borrower‟s existing exposures are categorized as exposures that have already
evidenced difficulty repaying in accordance with regulatory credit risk classification
criteria in force or the bank‟s internal credit rating system.
6. A borrower is in non-performing status or would be categorized as non-performing
without concessions.
7. The borrower cannot obtain funds from sources other than the existing bank at an
effective interest rate equal to the current market interest rate for similar loans or debt
securities for a non-troubled counterparty.

This list is not intended to be exhaustive.

--- Page 35 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 25 of 29

Examples of concessions

The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision cites the following as examples of concessions
that could be granted to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty:

Extending the loan term;
Rescheduling the dates of principal or interest payments;
Granting new or additional periods of non-payment (grace period);
Reducing the interest rate, resulting in an effective interest rate below the current interest
rate that counterparties with similar risk characteristics could obtain from the same or
other institutions in the market;
Capitalizing arrears;
Forgiving, deferring or postponing interest or relevant fees;
Changing an amortizing loan to an interest payment only;
Releasing collateral or accepting lower levels of collateralization;
Allowing the conversion of debt to equity of the counterparty;
10. Deferring recovery/collection actions for extended periods of time; and
11. Easing of covenants.

This list is not intended to be exhaustive.

--- Page 36 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 26 of 29

ANNEX E – STATEMENT OF CHANGES OF ECL ALLOWANCE ON CREDIT FACILITIES


STAGE 1 Provisions
STAGE 2 Provisions
STAGE 3 Provisions
Total ECL Provisions

12-month ECL
Lifetime ECL
Lifetime ECL

ECL Allowance as of 1 January 20-XX




Transfers:




From Stage 1 to Stage 2




From Stage 1 to Stage 3




From Stage 2 to Stage 3




From Stage 3 to Stage 2




From Stage 3 to Stage 1




From Stage 2 to Stage 1




Newly originated or purchased Loans,
Increase in exposure




Loan repayments




Loans derecognized




Changes in model parameters




Changes due to management overlays




Changes in foreign exchange rate
(FX related exposures)




ECL Allowance as of 31 March 20-XX

--- Page 37 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 27 of 29

ANNEX F – RECONCILIATION OF ECL ALLOWANCE AND REGULATORY PROVISION
ON CREDIT FACILITIES



TOTAL
Regulatory Provisions as of 1 January 20-XX


Specific Provisions:


Substandard

Doubtful

Bad/Loss

Total Specific Provisions





General Provisions:


Standard

Non-funded facilities

Total General Provisions


Total Regulatory Provisions (A)





ECL Allowance as of 1 January 20-XX


Stage 1 ECL Allowance

Stage 2 ECL Allowance

Stage 3 ECL Allowance

Total ECL Allowance (B)





Loan Loss Reserve [Max (A – B; 0)]

--- Page 38 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Page 28 of 29

ANNEX G – ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE OF TEMPORARY TREATMENT OF DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN ECL ALLOWANCE AND REGULATORY PROVISION

Scenario 1: When IFRS 9 ECL Allowance is greater than Regulatory Provision for Credit
Losses
On January 1, 20-XX, Bank A had IFRS 9 ECL Allowance of BDT 63 billion on funded facilities
and BDT 2 billion on non-funded facilities. Bank A also had regulatory provision of BDT 61 billion
(aggregate of funded and non-funded facilities).

On March 31, 20-XX, Bank A estimated IFRS 9 ECL Allowance of BDT 65 billion on funded
facilities and BDT 2.5 billion on non-funded facilities. Bank A also estimated regulatory provision of
BDT 64 billion (aggregate of funded and non-funded facilities).

Accounting Treatment on March 31, 20-XX: Bank A should maintain the higher of the two
provision standards which is IFRS 9 ECL Allowance of BDT 67.5 billion. No Loan Loss Reserve is
required since IFRS 9 ECL Allowance exceeds regulatory requirement.


BDT billion
BDT billion
ECL Provision expense
2.5

ECL Allowance – Loans and Advances

2.0
ECL Allowance – Other Liabilities (non-funded facilities)

0.5
[To comply with IFRS 9 requirement]


Scenario 2: When IFRS 9 ECL Allowance is less than Regulatory Provision for Credit Losses
On January 1, 20-XX, Bank A had IFRS 9 ECL Allowance of BDT 63 billion on funded facilities
and BDT 2 billion on non-funded facilities. Bank A also had regulatory provisions of BDT 61
billion (aggregate of funded and non-funded facilities).

On March 31, 20-XX, Bank A estimated IFRS 9 ECL Allowance of BDT 65 billion on funded
facilities and BDT 2.5 billion on non-funded facilities. Bank A also estimated regulatory provisions
of BDT 69 billion (aggregate of funded and non-funded facilities).

Accounting Treatment on March 31, 20-XX: Bank A should maintain the higher of the 2 provision
standards which is regulatory provision of BDT 69 billion. Bank A must continue to comply with
IFRS 9 but must also account for the regulatory provision shortfall (Loan Loss Reserve). The
regulatory provision shortfall arises from regulatory provision exceeding IFRS 9 ECL Allowance.


BDT billion
BDT billion
ECL Provision expense
2.5

ECL Allowance – Loans and Advances

2.0
ECL Allowance – Other Liabilities (non-funded facilities)

0.5
[To comply with IFRS 9 requirement]


Retained Earnings
1.5

Loan Loss Reserve (i.e., BDT 69 billion – BDT 67.5 billion)

1.5
[To comply with regulatory provision requirement shortfall]

--- Page 39 ---
Guidance For Banks in Implementing IFRS 9 Financial Instruments

Page 29 of 29

ANNEX H – ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE OF TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Bank A has CET1 capital of 70,000 and credit loss provisions of 1,200 as of December 31, 20-X0, prior to adopting IFRS 9. Bank A
requires IFRS 9 expected credit loss provisions at the point of transition on January 1, 20X1, of 1,500. Thereafter ECL provisions
increases to 1,800, 2,050, 2,250, 2,400, and 2,425 over the next 5 years. Suppose that, Bank A‟s tax rate is 25%. The bank is
permitted to transition the impact of DAY 1 IFRS 9 provisions for regulatory capital adequacy purposes over the next 5 years.

1. Fully Loaded impact on CET1 Capital at the point of transition:


CET1
Capital
Description
CET1 capital as of 31 December 20X0

70,000

Impact on retained earnings from adopting
IFRS 9 (1,500 - 1,200)
(300)

Reduction in retained earnings
Deferred tax asset resulting from the impact on
retained earnings (300 * 0.25)
75

Resulting from a temporary difference between
expected (IFRS 9) and incurred loss (tax) provisions


(225)
IFRS 9 DAY 1 Impact on regulatory Capital resulting
from the impact on retained earnings
CET1 capital as of 1 January 20X1

69,775*
Fully loaded CET1 Capital
* Since this is an illustration, deferred tax adjustments have not been considered for simplicity. Bank should follow BB directives on
deferred tax adjustments while calculating CET1 capital.

2. Transitional impact on CET1 Capital over regulatory-specified period:

IFRS 9 Provision
at Reporting date
Fully loaded CET1 Capital
[B=Bt-1– (A – At-1) * 0.75]
Transition
relief over 5
years
Transition adjustment
added back to CET1
capital
(D = 225 * C)
CET1 Capital
after transition
adjustment
(E = B + D)
January 1, 20X1
1,500
69,775.00
95%
213.75
69,988.75
January 1, 20X2
1,800
69,550.00
85%
191.25
69,741.25
January 1, 20X3
2,050
69,362.50
70%
157.50
69,520.00
January 1, 20X4
2,250
69,212.50
50%
112.50
69,325.00
January 1, 20X5
2,400
69,100.00
25%
56.25
69,156.25
January 1, 20X6
2,425
69,081.25
69,081.25