--- Page 1 ---
1/2



Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh
website: www.bb.org.bd


Banking Regulation &
Policy Department- 1

05 May 2026
BRPD-1 Circular Letter No.- 15 Date: ----------------------




22 Baishakh 1433

Managing Director/Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks operating in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Prudential Regulations for Consumer Financing
(Regulations for Auto Loans and Personal Loans).

Please refer to BRPD Circular No. 07, dated November 03, 2004, BRPD Circular No. 04, dated
April 03, 2017 and BRPD Circular Letter No. 59 dated 31 December 2024 on the captioned
subject.

2. The demand and usage of electric and hybrid vehicles are steadily increasing in the country
because of their eco-friendly and energy-efficient characteristics. With a view to reflecting the
current market price of automobiles and encouraging consumers to purchase electric and hybrid
vehicles, it has been decided to make changes in Regulation-16 of Prudential Regulations for
Consumer Financing, which shall stand as under:

Regulation 16 (Regulations for Auto Loans):

“The banks shall not allow auto loans (including insurance) exceeding Tk. 60 (Sixty) Lac per
individual under this head. However, banks may allow auto loan facility up to Tk. 80 (Eighty)
Lac per individual for purchasing electric and hybrid vehicles. For the purpose of this regulation,
any auto loan facility provided to the dependent members of an individual shall also be treated as
part of the exposure of that individual.
While allowing auto loans, the financing facility shall be provided at a maximum debt-equity
ratio of 60:40. However, in case of allowing auto loans for purchasing hybrid or electric cars, the
financing facility shall be provided at a maximum debt-equity ratio of 80:20.”

3. The consumer product market in Bangladesh has been growing rapidly over the last few years,
and rising per capita income, along with the country’s GDP growth, has driven consumer
spending. Considering the existing market price and the increasing demand for consumer goods,
it has been decided to make changes in Regulation-30 of Prudential Regulations for Consumer
Financing, which shall stand as under:

Regulation 30 (Regulations for Personal Loans Including Loans for the Purchase of
Consumer Durables):

"Limits per person for such loans will be Tk. 10 (Ten) Lac without any securities. However,
banks may lend higher amounts provided the loans are secured appropriately. But, in no case, the
loan amount will be allowed to exceed Tk. 40 (Forty) Lac. The loan secured against liquid
securities shall, however, be exempted from this limit.''

--- Page 2 ---
2/2



(From Previous Page)


4. Besides, banks are instructed to provide consumer finance in such a way that, in any case, the
growth rate in total loans under 'Consumer Financing' must not exceed the growth rate of the
bank's total loans.

5. Instructions provided vide BRPD Circular No. 07/2004 and subsequent circulars or circular
letters on the captioned subject hereby stand superseded by this circular letter.

6. This directive has been issued by Bangladesh Bank in exercise of its power conferred on it
under Section 45 of the Bank Company Act, 1991, as amended. This circular Letter will
come into force with immediate effect.

Yours faithfully,

(Gazi Md. Mahfuzul Islam)
Director (BRPD)
Phone: 9530252