--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bb.org.bd

ব্যাংকিং প্রবিধি ও নীতি বিভাগ
বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক
প্রধান কার্যালয়
ঢাকা।
বিআরপিডি সার্কুলার লেটার নং-২৪
ব্যবস্থাপনা পরিচালক/প্রধান নির্বাহী কর্মকর্তা

বাংলাদেশে SATS সকল তফসিলি ব্যাংক।

Company Matter No. 299 of 2019
(MM Structural and Holding Limited and others Vs.
International Leasing and Financial Services Limited (ILFSL) and others)

শিরোনামোক্ত বিষয়ে বাংলাদেশ সুপ্রিম কোর্ট এর হাইকোর্ট বিভাগের আদেশ নং-৩২, তারিখ: ২৪/০৫/২০২২ এ প্রদত্ত

8 নং নির্দেশনার প্রতি আপনাদের দৃষ্টি আকর্ষণ করা যাচ্ছে। মহামান্য আদালত উক্ত আদেশে বর্ণিত বিষয়টি সকল তফসিলি ব্যাংক

44

ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহকে অবহিত করার জন্য বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংকের প্রতি নির্দেশনা প্রদান করেছেন । নির্দেশনাটি নিম্ন


“The Governor, Bangladesh Bank shall notify all the Scheduled Banks and

Financial Institutions to the effect that the holders of Cheques issued in the name

of the International Leasing and Financial Services Limited are required
approach the Company Court first before presenting any Cheque signed by

Court-appointed Directors.”

to

the

০২। এমতাবস্থায়, উপরোল্লিখিত আদেশের বিষয়ে প্রয়োজনীয় ব্যবস্থা গ্রহণের জন্য আপনাদেরকে নির্দেশনা দেয়া যাচ্ছে।

আদালতের উক্ত আদেশের ছায়ালিপি এতদসঙ্গে সংযুক্ত করা AA |

আপনাদের বিশ্বস্ত,
সহযোজনী: ১২ বোর) পাতা | Gros —

(মোঃ আলী আ

কবর ফরাজী)

পরিচালক (বিআরপিডি)
ফোন 8 ৯৫৩০০৯৫

--- Page 2 ---
Ord, No.

WW) ১.0.
৬ IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BA

32

GLADESH
HIGH COURT DIVISION
(STATUTORY ORIGINAL JE RISDICTION }

Company Matter No. 299 of 2019

lV IN THE MALTER OF
An application for immunity of the Court-
appointed Independent Directors including
the Court-appointed Charman of IFS!
from any legal actions against them im
respect of affairs of the ILFSL while

4৮ performing their duty as the € ourt-appotnted
Board of Directors .
uv AND

In the matter of.
MM Structural and Holdimg Limited and
Petitioners

সহিত oor ও ated বিভাগ

others

-Versus-
International Leasing and Financial Services
Limited (ILFSL) and others
. Respondents

Mr. Margub Kabir, Advocate with
Mr Md. Mahfuzur Rahman (M:lon). Advocate
scenes For the ILFSL-Applicant

The 24" May, 2022 ,

Present:
Justice Muhammad Khurshid Alam Sarkar

By filing an application, the respondent No.1-Company

Intemational Leasing and Financial Services Limited (hereinafter
referred to either as the ‘applicant’ or as the ILFSL) sought for an Order
from this Court ensuring immunity of the Court-appointed Board of
Directors from any legal actions against them in respect of the affairs of
the ILFSL while performing their duty as the Court-appointed Chairman
and Directors of the ILFSL.

It is stated in the application that as per order No. 13 dated

19.03.2020 passed by this Court in Company Matter No, 299 of 2019,

--- Page 3 ---
Mr. Naztul Islam Khan joined the ILFSL on 01.06.2020. His
Appointment as Court-appointed Chairman has been approved by the
Bangladesh Bank vide its Memo No. DFIM(S)1055/56/25/2020-951
dated 05.07.2020. Since his appointment Mr. Nazrul Islam Khan has
been discharging his functions as the Court-appointed Chairman as per
the direction of the Court. His contribution to the 11,191, and his
sincerity to his duties have been recognized by the Court vide Order
dated 21.10.2020, the relevant extract of which is as follows:
“Then, in order to run the business of ILFSL 16590918117 and
professionally, on 19.01.2020, this Court-appointed Mr. Ibrahim
Khaled, former Deputy Governor of the Bangladesh Bank, as the
Independent Chairman of the ILFSL who after performing his
duties for a few days resigned from the post of the Independent
Chairman on the ground of his health condition and, thereafter,
vide order dated 19.03.2020, this Court appointed Mr. Nazrul
Islam Khan (NI Khan), as the Independent Chairman of the

ILFSL. Since his appointment, Mr. NI Khan is putting his best
efforts to recover the loan monies as well as to pay off the

depositors’ money and, at the same_time_he is 8150 providing
every updates to this Court by filing affidavits from time-to-

time.”
{underlined to put emphasis]

Subsequently this Court extensively reconstituted the Board of the
ILFSL by appointing 5 (five) Independent Directors vide Order No. 27
dated 16.06.2021 upon allowing the ILFSL’s application for induction of
a few members of the Board and accordingly the following persons were
inducted in the Board of the respondent No. | Company:

(1) Mr, Sayed Abu Naser Bakhtear Ahmed
(2) Mr. Md. Shafiqul Islam

--- Page 4 ---
(3) Brigadier General (retired) Md. Meftaul Karim
(4) Mr. Md. Ashraf Ali, Barrister-at-Law
(5) Mr. Enamul Hasan, FCA

It is stated that since Mr. Nazrul Islam Khan joined the ILFSL as

its Chairman on 01.06.2020, the Board has been successful in recovering

Tk.180 crore from various borrowers. With that money, the ILFSL has

been able to pay Tk. 126 crore to the depositors and Tk. 30 crore to its
various creditors. (including various banks and financial institutions)
against loans taken. The ILFSL also paid VAT, Tax and other expenses

to carry out its operation. Since joining of the Court-appointed

Chariman, Mr. NI Khan, all financial transactions of the company are
being made electronically without issuance of any cheque. Subsequently

this Court vide its Order No. 21 dated 16.03.2021 allowed the ILFSL’s
application for immunity of the Court-appointed Chairman from any

legal actions against him in respect of affairs of the ILFSL while

performing his duty as the Court-appointed Chairman and passed, inter

alia, the following Direction:
“It is declared that Mr. N.I. Khan is not and shall not be
responsible for any illegality committed by the Board of
the Directors of the ILFSL or management of the ILFSL
before his joining as the Chairman of the ILFSL in
issuance of any cheque or for any other irregularity
committed by them before the joining of Mr. NI Khan. He
shall not be made party to any civil or criminal case in
which the cause of action arose before his joining.
However, there shall not be any bar to institute any suit or
file any-case against him in course of performing his duties
as the Court-appointed Chairman, if there is any specific

and clear evidence of violation of any law of the land.”

--- Page 5 ---
It is stated that before Mr. Nazrul Islam Khan and other Court-
appointed Directors joined the ILFSL, its previous Board of Directors
issued various security and other Cheques on behalf of the ILFSL in
favour of different persons/ entities. They also provided blank cheques
to different entities. The said persons/entities by putting current and
recent dates are placing those cheques for clearing and as the ILFSL has
liquidity crisis, a good number of cheques are being dishonored.
Thereafter, the entities are filing proceedings under Section 138 read
with Section 140 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (NI Act)
against the ILFSL and its Directors including the Court-appointed
Chairman, although he was not the Chairman when the cheques were

provided nor is he a signatory of the said cheques. Even then, the Court-
appointed Chairman has been implicated as accused. It its stated that the
following blank Cheques were issued by the previous Board of the
ILFSL before the appointment of the Court-appointéd Chairman Mr.

Nazrul Islam Khan: .

(1) | Cheque No. 7903330 drawn on the Premier Bank
Limited for the amount of Tk. 21,93,518 (twenty lac
ninety-three thousand five hundred and eighteen)

(2) | Cheque No. 7903331! drawn on the Premier Bank
Limited for the amount of Tk. 21,93,518 (twenty lac
ninety-three thousand five hundred and eighteen)

Both the blank Cheques were issued in favour of the UAE
Bangladesh Investment Company Limited (UBICO) of Erectors House,
(54 Floor), 18 Kamal Ataturk Avenue, Banani C/A, Dhaka. It is further
stated that even though the blank cheques were provided in 2019,
UBICO subsequently inserted dates on the said blank Cheques. Cheque

No. 7903330 was subsequently dated 10.01.2021 and Cheque No.

--- Page 6 ---
7903331 was subsequently dated 10.02.2021. On presentation of the said

Cheques, both of them were dishonored. Cheque No. 7903330 was

dishonored on 31.01.2021 and Cheque No, 7903331 was dishonoured on
16.02.2021. Both of the Cheques were dishonored with the remark
“account closed or dormant or blocked.” Subsequently UBICO filed
CR. Case No. 543 of 2021 in the Court of Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate, Dhaka with respect to Cheque No. 790330 and C.R. Case
No. 544 of 2021 in the Court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka
with respect to Cheque No. 790331, both under Section 138/ 140 of the
NI Act, most illegally implicating the Court-appointed Chairman Mr.
Nazrul Islam Khan as one of the accused. Even though it is within the
public knowledge that Mr. Nazrul Islam Khan is a Court-appointed
Chairman, UBICO most illegally implicated Mr. Khan only to harass
and humiliate him and in the process frustrate the noble objectives of the
Court and in relation to the said CR cases, the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate Court No. 31, Dhaka issued Warrant of Arrest for the Court-
appointed Chairman of ILFSL Mr. Nazrul Islam Khan along with
previous Directors of the ILFSL. The police came to the Head Office of
ILFSL on 18.05.2022 for executing the warrant. Thereafter on
19.05.2022, Mr. Nazrul Islam Khan filed an application before the
leamed Court below praying for recall of the Warrant of Arrest and
prayed for removal of his name from the said CR cases on the basis of
the Order of this Court dated 16.03.2021 passed in Company Matter No.
299 of 2019, The learned Court vide Order dated 19.05.2022 recalled the

Warrant of Arrest issued for Mr. Nazrul Islam Khan.

--- Page 7 ---
It is stated that the said C.R. cases were filed against the Court-
appointed Chairman of the ILFSL even though the complainant knew
fully well that the Chairman Mr, Nazrul Islam Khan was appointed by
the Court for a special purpose. Therefore, it is clear that the said CLR.
cases have been filed with malafide intention in derogation of the Order
No. 21 dated 16.03.2021 passed by this Court directing that Mr. Nazrul
Islam Khan shall not be made party to any civil er criminal case in
which the cause of action arose before his joining. It is also clear that the
said C.R. cases have been filed in relation to the said blank Cheques by
willfully inserting dates after Mr. Khan joined ILFSL, only to frustrate
the very purpose of appointment of Mr. Nazrul Islam Khan as the
Chairman of the ILFSL by this Court, i.e., to salvage the company and
ensure that depositors get their money back and interest of common
shareholders are protected. As such, the institution of the said C.R. cases
against Mr. Nazrul Islam Khan is clearly a contempt of this Court made
with malafide intention.

Mr. Margub Kabir with Mr. Md. Mahfuzur Rahman (Milon), the
leamed Advocate for the applicant submits that the Court-appointed
Independent Directors cannot and do not have any information or
knowledge about any Cheque issued prior to their appointment by the
previous Board of the ILFSL and hence, any liability arising out of any
dishonor of those Cheques are attributable exclusively to the affairs of
the previous directors of the company and not to the affairs of the court-
appointed directors of the Board. However, the payees of those Cheques

are now implicating the Court-appointed Independent Directors instead

--- Page 8 ---
of the previous directors with the malafide intention to frustrate the very
purpose of the Orders passed by this Court to salvage the company and
ensure that depositors get their money back and interest of common
shareholders are protected. He submits that the immunity which was
previously granted to the Court-appointed Chairman needs to be granted
to all other Court-appointed Independent Directors, lest they are
implicated in any criminal cases in the same manner as the aforesaid
CR. cases and, although there is no scope of implicating the Court-
appointed Independent Directors in any proceedings under Section 138

of the NI Act and/ or Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 2003, even then the said
Court-appointed Independent Directors are in constant risk of being
implicated by the unscrupulous in such proceedings. Mr. Kabir,
therefore, prays to have an Order from this Court ensuring immunity of
the Court-appointed Independent Directors, including the Court-
appointed Chairman of ILFSL from any legal actions against them in
respect of the affairs of the ILFSL while performing their duty as the
Court-appointed Chairman and Directors of the ILFSL. The learned
Advocate for the applicant informs this Court that the Court-appointed
Independent Directors, including the Court-appointed Chairman of
ILFSL have been trying their best to refund the money of the depositors,
including his clients and, therefore, as he submits, this Court should pass
necessary Orders and Directions to let them perform their duties
peacefully.

After perusing the application together with its annexures and

hearing the learned Advocate for the applicant-ILFSL and the learned

--- Page 9 ---
Advocate for the petitioners of the substantive matter, it appears to this
Court that the substantive matter is about winding up of the ILFSL. On
19.01.2020, upon hearing the parties, instead of admitting the application
for winding up, this Court passed some Orders/Directions upon the
ILFSL, Bangladesh Bank and, also, upon some State-Functionaries to
keep the company running and operational. In that process. this Court
also ventured to reconstitute the Board of Directors of the ILFSL with an
expectation of running the company more efficiently having appointed
Mr. NL, Khan as the Independent Director-cum-Chairman of the ILFSL

From the submissions advanced by the learned Advocate for the
applicant-ILFSL, it appears to this Court that since the appointment of
the Independent Chairman to the Board of ILFSL, the company is trying
its best to collect the outstanding dues from the persons/entities who
have taken loans from ILFSL and, at the same time, ILFSL is also trying
to refund deposits to the depositors. Therefore, it appears to this Court
that the approach of the applicant-ILFSL appears to this Court to be very

pragmatic and bonafide. And, in fact, in most of the Orders, by which

this Court appoints Independent Chairman of any company, it is usually

expressly stated that the Court-appointed Chairman shall not be liable for

non-payment of any cheques which were issued by the company before

his appointment as the Chairman of the company.

Accordingly, the application is allowed with the following

(1)It is declared that the Court-appointed Independent

Directors, including the Court-appointed Chairman, of the

--- Page 10 ---
ILFSL. ate not and shall not be responsible for any illegality
committed by the Board of the Directors of the ILFSL or
management of the ILFSL before their joining as the Court-
appointed Independent Directors including the Court-
appointed Chairman of ILFSL in issuance of any cheque or
for any other irregularity committed by them before the
joining of the Court-appointed Independent Directors,
including the Court-appointed Chairman of ILFSL. The
Court-appointed Independent Directors including the Court-
appointed Chairman of ILFSL namely; (a) Mr. Nazrul
Islam Khan (N.I. Khan) (joined on 01.06.20), (b) Mr. Sayed
Abu Naser Bakhtear Ahmed (joined on 12.07.21), (c) Mr.
Md. Shafiqul Islam (joined on 12.07.21), (d) Brigadier
General (retired) Md. Meftaul Karim (joined on 12.07.21),
(e) Mr. Md. Ashraf Ali, Barrister-at-Law (joined on
12.07.21) and, (f) Mr. Enamul Hasan, FCA (joined on
12.07.21) shall not be made party to any civil or criminal
case in:which the cause of action arose before his joining.
Further, they shall not be treated as defaulter for any past
loar/liabilities of the ILFSL. However, there shall not be
any bar to institute any suit or file any case against them in
course of performing their duties as the Court-appointed
Independent Directors including the Court appointed
Chairman of ILFSL, if there is any specific and clear

evidence of violation of any law of the land.

--- Page 11 ---
10

The name of the Court-appointed Chaitman Mr. N.1 Khan
is hereby struck out/deleted from the proceeding being C.R.
Case No. 543 of 2021 and 0.1). Case No. 544 of 2021, now
pending before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Court
No.31, Dhaka,

All the creditors of the International Leasing and Financial
Services Limited are hereby restrained from commencing
any legal actions implicating any of the Court-appointed
Independent Directors, including but not limited to
proceedings under Section 138 of the NI Act, Artha Rin
Adalat Ain, 2003 and/or Penal Code, 1860, without first

notifying the Company Court;

@ Te Governor, Bangladesh Bank shall notify all the


Scheduled Banks and Financial Institutions to the effect that

the holders of Cheques issued in the name of the

International Leasing and Financial Services Limited are
required ‘to approach the Company Court first before
resentingeatiy Cheque signed by the Court-appointed
Directors.

(a) The Secretary, Law and Justice Division, Ministry of
Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, (b) all the District
and Sessions Judges, (c) all the Metropolitan Session
Judges, (d) all the Chief Metropolitan Magistrates and (e)

all the Chief Judicial Magistrates of the country are hereby

directed রি take necessary steps regarding striking

--- Page 12 ---
out/exclusion of the names of the aforesaid Court-appointed

Independent Directors from all the proceedings commenced

under Section 138 of the NI Act 1981, Artha Rin Adalat

Ain, 2003 and/or Penal Code. 1860 if any, against the

International Leasing and Financial Services Limited in

connection with any affairs or loans of ILFSL prior to their

joining, and/or in connection to any Cheque issued during

the tenure of the previous Board of Directors or in which

they are not signatories and to recall and cancel any

summons and/or warrant already issued, if any, in
pursuance of any of the aforesaid proceedings.

The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and the Inspector
General of Police are directed to take necessary steps not to
enforce but to retum to the concerned Court any

summons/warrant issued in the names of the aforesaid

Court-appointed Independent Directors in any proceedings

commenced under Section 138 of the NI Act 188land/or

Penal Code, 1860 against the International Leasing and
Financial Services Limited in connection with any Cheque
if shown to have been issued by of the Court-appointed
Board of Directors of ILFSL.

The Registrar, High Court Division is directed to circulate
this Order upon all the District and Sessions Judges, all the
Metropolitan Session Judges, all the Chief Metropolitan

Magistrates and all the Chief Judicial Magistrates of

--- Page 13 ---
“ov

Bangladesh in addition to publish this Order in the website
of Supreme Court of Bangladesh,

The Office is directed to serve notices upon the following State
Functionaries, namely, (i) The Governor, Bangladesh Bank, (ii) The
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, (iii) The Inspector General of
Police, (iv) The Secretary, Law and Justice Division, Ministry of Law,
Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, (v) The Registrar General of the
Supreme Court of Bangladesh, (vi) District and Sessions Judge of Dhaka
and (vii) learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Court No.31, Dhaka at once
by a Special Messenger at the costs of the respondent No. 1-company.

The respondent No. 1-company (ILFSL) is directed to put in

requisites for service of notices.

Muhammad Khurshid Alam Sarkar

Memo nod 9 ০ ত. 0.5... Dated- FOS "2022

opy forwarded for information and necessary action to:
Ane Governor, Bangladesh Bank, Motijheel, Dhaka.

Vhe Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs. Dhaka.

The Inspeetor General of Police. Police Head Quarter. Dhaka. ;
4. The Secretary. Law and Justice Division, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary A tlairs,
Dhaka.

The Registrar General, Bangladesh Supreme Court,

6. District and Sessions Judge of Dhaka.

7. Learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Court No. 31, Dhaka.



By Order

(6৪৮ (Civil Original Jurisdiction)

Supermtendent Suprgme Court of Bangladesh
Beh Court Division, Dhaka.

57

Composed by: Saiful Islam

Read by: এল,

Exam by; / CAG SC. 27
FU

we ৯০০