--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 8

Website: www.bb.org.bd
Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

BRPD Circular No: 02
Date:
13 Falgun 1425
25 February 2019

Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,
Policy for Offshore Banking Operation of the Banks in Bangladesh.
Please refer to the letter no. BCD(P)744(27)/1416 dated-17 December 1985,
S.R.O. no. 474-4/85 dated-12 November 1985, other relevant instructions in various
circulars
and
circular
letters
thereafter
and
official
gazette
no.
BRPD(P-
3)/744(27)/2019-1682 dated- 25 February 2019 issued by Bangladesh Bank on the
captioned subject.
Offshore banking (OB) has undergone a long developmental transition in
Bangladesh due to the global and internal business dynamics. Since the initiation in
1985 in Bangladesh, concurrent global and internal business dynamics necessitate
the revision and upgradation of the policy on offshore banking to streamline the
operations. For this purpose, official gazette no. BRPD(P-3)/744(27)/2019-1682
dated- 25 February 2019 and BRPD Circular Letter no-03 dated- 25 February 2019
have been issued by Bangladesh Bank repealing the S.R.O. no. 474-4/85 dated-12
November 1985. In this situation being the said S.R.O. has been repealed, in exercise
of the powers conferred by the Bank-Company Act, 1991 (amended up to 2018) and
the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, Bangladesh Bank makes the following set
of instructions that shall have to be followed for conducting offshore banking in
Bangladesh by the scheduled banks.
3. Definitions
As used in this circular, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated
below unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
3.1. "Domestic Banking Unit (DBU)" shall refer to a business unit of a bank that
carries out banking operations other than offshore banking;
3.2. “Economic Zone (EZ)” shall refer to any economic zone declared by the
Government under section 5 of the Bangladesh Economic Zones Act, 2010;
3.3. “Export Processing Zone (EPZ)” shall refer to a place or places to be
specified by the Government under section 10 of the Bangladesh Export
Processing Zones Authority Act, 1980 as an export processing zone for the
purposes of setting up export oriented industries;

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 8

3.4. “Hi-tech Park” shall refer to a place specified by the Government under
Section 2(6) of the Bangladesh Hi-Tech Park Authority Act, 2010 (Act No.
VIII of 2010) as a categorically definitive zone to promote IT Industry in
Bangladesh;
3.5. “Juristic Person” shall refer to an entity (other than a natural person)
created by law as a legal entity having distinct identity, legal personality,
duties and rights.
3.6. “Non-resident" shall refer to a person who is not a "Person resident in
Bangladesh".
3.7. "Person" shall refer to an individual and others as defined in the Section
2(hh) of the 'Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (Act no VII of 1947)'.
3.8. "Person Resident in Bangladesh" shall refer to a person as defined in the
Section 2(hhh) of the 'Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (Act no VII of
1947)'.
3.9. “Private Export Processing Zone (PEPZ)” shall refer to a private export
processing zone declared by the Government under section 11 of
Bangladesh Private Export Processing Zones Authority Act, 1996 for setting
up export oriented industries;
3.10.
"Offshore Banking" shall refer to the particular conduct of banking
operations in foreign currencies conditionally approved by Bangladesh
Bank;
3.11.
“Offshore Banking Division” shall refer to the business management unit
of a bank that controls and supervises the offshore banking operations; and
3.12.
"Offshore Banking Unit (OBU)" shall refer to a specific business unit in
the form of distinct branch, booth or desk of a branch of a bank that is duly
approved by Bangladesh Bank to carry out the offshore banking.
4. Approval for conducting offshore banking in Bangladesh
Any scheduled bank willing to operate offshore banking in Bangladesh shall have
to obtain approval from Bangladesh Bank. Offshore banking activities shall be
carried out through Offshore Banking Unit/Units under the control and
supervision of Offshore Banking Division of the bank.
4.1. A bank willing to operate offshore banking in Bangladesh shall have to
apply to the Banking Regulation and Policy Department (BRPD) of
Bangladesh Bank along with the information and documents as stated in
‘Annexure: A’. Bangladesh Bank will assess the bank’s overall performance
as well as specific performance, evaluate the bank's capacity to operate
offshore banking and do due diligence before giving the approval.

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 of 8

4.2. Along with the application for the approval of offshore banking or after
getting the approval of offshore banking, a bank shall apply for permission
of each OBU. There is no restriction on the physical location of the OBUs.
They may be located either in the Export Processing Zones/Private Export
Processing Zone/Economic Zones, or any other convenient location in
Bangladesh. With prior approval from Bangladesh Bank, existing branches
of banks may also be allowed to operate offshore banking through separate
desk. Authorization of Bangladesh Export Processing Zones Authority
(BEPZA)/ Bangladesh Private Export Processing Zones Authority (PEPZA)/
Bangladesh Economic Zones Authority (BEZA)/other similar designated
authority, if intended to locate the OBU therein, is a prerequisite before
approaching to Bangladesh Bank.
4.3. Banks that are currently operating offshore banking unit under the
approval of Bangladesh Bank shall also apply for approval for offshore
banking operation and for updating the approvals of OBUs along with the
information and documents as stated in ‘Annexure: A’ within 3 (three)
months of the issuance of this circular.
4.4. The bank applying for the approval of offshore banking operation must have
well-established correspondent relationship with reputed banks/financial
institutions abroad and links with important international financial centers.
4.5. Closure
of
bank's
offshore
banking
operation
as
well
as
closure/shifting/merging of any OBU requires prior permission from
Bangladesh Bank.
5. Commencement of Operation
5.1. The bank shall commence their offshore banking operation within 6 (six)
months or the time period subsequently extended by Bangladesh Bank from
the issuing date of approval. Non-compliance regarding commencement of
operation within the stipulated time period will automatically lead to
cancellation of the permission for offshore banking.
5.2. Date of commencement of the offshore banking operation of a bank or of an
OBU shall be notified in writing to Banking Regulation & Policy Department,
Department of Off-site Supervision, Foreign Exchange Policy Department,
Foreign Exchange Operation Department, Foreign Exchange Investment
Department, Department of Foreign Exchange Inspection, Forex Reserve
and Treasury Management Department, Monetary Policy Department,
Department of Currency Management, Payment Systems Department,
concerned Department of Banking Inspection, Motijheel Office, and the
concerned office of Bangladesh Bank within 7(seven) days of such
commencement.

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 8

6. Operation/Transactions of offshore banking
6.1. With enterprises in EPZs, PEPZs, EZs and Hi-tech Parks
6.1.1. With fully foreign-owned enterprises
Offshore
banking
operation/transactions
with
fully
foreign-owned
enterprises in EPZs, PEPZs, EZs and Hi-tech Parks shall include nothing
other than accepting deposits, making short term loans/advances and
investments, discounting bills, negotiating bills, issuing letter of credit and
guarantee. However, prior permission from the Foreign Exchange
Investment Department of Bangladesh Bank is required in accordance
with the instructions/circulars issued from time to time before making any
medium and long term financing facility to the said enterprises.
6.1.2. With enterprises other than fully foreign-owned
With prior permission from the Foreign Exchange Investment Department
of Bangladesh Bank, banks, as part of their offshore banking, may make
loans/advances to the enterprises other than fully foreign-owned in EPZs,
PEPZs, EZs and Hi-tech Parks.
6.2. With Juristic persons not resident in Bangladesh
Offshore banking transactions with the juristic persons not resident in
Bangladesh shall include nothing other than accepting deposits and
borrowings. However, with prior permission from the Foreign Exchange
Investment Department of Bangladesh Bank, banks, as part of their
offshore banking, may also make loans/advances to the juristic persons
not resident in Bangladesh provided that the full amount of loan/advance
is covered by (a) guarantee/letter of credit from a licensed bank abroad
with acceptable credit rating, and/or (b) foreign exchange brought in from
abroad and deposited in a bank in Bangladesh.
6.3. With natural persons not resident in Bangladesh
Offshore banking transactions with the natural persons not resident in
Bangladesh including Bangladeshi nationals working abroad (NRBs) shall
include nothing other than accepting deposits.
6.4. With persons residents in Bangladesh
A bank, in its offshore banking operation, may discount bills accepted by
ADs in Bangladesh against import L/Cs opened on deferred/usance basis
applying due diligence and arrange payment to overseas suppliers.

--- Page 5 ---
Page 5 of 8

7. Limitation on activities
Banks are prohibited from the following activities in offshore banking operation:
7.1. Engage in any direct or indirect, funded or non-funded banking
transactions that goes beyond transactions specified in paragraph 6;
7.2. Accepting deposit or loan which is repayable on demand by cheque, draft,
pay order or any other instrument drawn by depositor on the offshore
banking unit;
7.3. Placement of fund to DBU.
7.4. Any transaction using the Nostro Account of the domestic banking
operation.
7.5. Remittance of money to any overseas destinations other than for the
operation/transactions stated in paragraph 6;
7.6. Granting credit facilities to its ‘Bank Related Persons’ as defined in section
26Ga of the Bank-Company Act, 1991 (amended up to 2018) exceeding the
quota prescribed by Bangladesh Bank from time to time even if any of them
are NRBs.
8. Prudential regulations
8.1. The banks shall have written guidelines approved by their Board of
Directors for conducting offshore banking operation.
8.2. No dealing shall be made for any speculative purpose.
8.3. Assets and liabilities created by offshore banking operation shall clearly be
identified at the time of such creation.
8.4. Bank shall maintain separate accounts relating to their offshore banking
business for assessing financial performance and other purposes. But
offshore banking operation shall be included in equivalent Bangladeshi
Taka (BDT) denomination while preparing solo basis financial statements of
the bank treating it as a business line.
8.5. The records of exchange position in foreign currencies of a bank (country
office in Bangladesh, in case of foreign banks) shall include exposures of the
offshore
banking
operation,
if
any.
Banks shall maintain
their
overall exposures in foreign
currencies (overall
exchange position) within
the ‘Open position limit’ at the end of the day as stated therein.
8.6. Instructions of Asset Liability Management (ALM) guidelines shall be
applicable for offshore banking operation.
8.7. At the close of business on any day, value of offshore banking assets in
Bangladesh shall not be less than 75% of the liabilities of offshore banking.
8.8. Source of funds for offshore banking operation shall be the deposits and
borrowings received as stated in paragraph 6. However, banks may also use
funds mobilized from other sources (domestic banking operation) with a
limit not exceeding 20% of its total regulatory capital.

--- Page 6 ---
Page 6 of 8

8.9. Banks shall have to comply with the Money Laundering Prevention Act,
2012, Anti Terrorism Act, 2009 and such other applicable regulations while
conducting their offshore banking business.
8.10.
Regulation regarding maintenance of capital, leverage and liquidity
ratios under Basel provisions shall be duly observed by offshore banking
operation. For the maintenance of capital that entails to offshore banking, if
required, banks may use funds from offshore banking operation and convert
to BDT.
8.11.
For the maintenance of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR), total demand and
time liabilities of the bank shall include the liability of offshore banking
operation. Statutory Liquidity Reserve (SLR) shall also be maintained
accordingly. For the maintenance of CRR and SLR that entails to offshore
banking, if required, banks may use funds from offshore banking operation
and convert to BDT.
8.12.
Unless stated otherwise, all regulatory limits imposed by Bangladesh
Bank regarding funded and non-funded exposure shall be applicable for
offshore banking operation.
8.13.
Offshore banking transactions of a bank are subject to periodic reporting
to Bangladesh Bank. Bank shall report their offshore banking transactions
in relevant statement/schedules in writing as well as report to online web
portal as per instructions mentioned in FE circular/circular letters. Besides,
they shall submit reports/returns to different departments of Bangladesh
Bank as and when asked for.
8.14.
Banks have to report their offshore banking operation to Bangladesh
Bank in a separate Classified Loan Statement (CL-1) named OBU Summary
of Loan Classification and Provision. All exposures provided by offshore
banking shall be reported in the statement and adequate provision shall be
maintained as per the requirement thereon.
8.15.
Banks having license for Islamic Shariah based banking services will be
allowed to provide Islamic Shariah based banking services through offshore
banking.
8.16.
Information of credit extended through offshore banking shall be subject
to report as per CIB regulations of Bangladesh Bank.
8.17.
Operation of offshore banking along with the sources and uses of funds
shall be subject to offsite and onsite supervision by Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 7 ---
Page 7 of 8

9. Termination and/or amendment of the approval for offshore banking
Bangladesh Bank reserves the right to amend/postpone/revoke the approval for
offshore banking operation of a bank or of any OBU. The approval may be revoked
by Bangladesh Bank at any time without showing any reason if, in the
consideration of Bangladesh Bank, the approval has contravened any instruction
or regulation of Bangladesh Bank. In the case of revocation of approval, after an
appropriate time interval with recaptured financial soundness, a bank may again
apply for new approval following the process described in paragraph 4.
10.
This policy shall come into force with an immediate effect and the applicability
of the letter No. BCD(P)744(27)/1416, dated- 17 December 1985 will be
superseded thereon. All the contracts made within the purview of previous
regulation will continue to their usual expiration. Any policy departure on a bank's
part caused by this new policy will be handled amenably provided the bank reports
the policy departure to Banking Regulation and Policy Department (BRPD) for
approval within 2 (two) months from the circulation of this policy.

Yours faithfully,


(A.K.M. Amjad Hussain)
General Manager
Phone: 9530252

--- Page 8 ---
Page 8 of 8

ANNEXURE: A
A. INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED IN THE APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION OF
OFFSHORE BANKING OPERATION

1. Name & Address of the Bank (Head/Country Office).
2. Date & place of incorporation list of affiliations, directors and the corporate set up.
3. Name of Stock-Exchange(s) where the Bank is listed.
4. Brief description of the specialized activities and past experience of the bank.
5. Whether the bank is represented in other Offshore Financial Centre(s) of the world
either directly or indirectly through associates and subsidiaries. If so, please
mention the name of the financial centre(s) with brief account of operations in
those financial centre(s).
6. Liquidity and solvency position, net worth and resource base and managerial &
international banking expertise of the bank.
7. Describe how the bank would benefit Bangladesh in developing the offshore
market/financial centre
8. Describe how the bank proposes to fund offshore banking operations in
Bangladesh
9. Estimated volume of offshore operations for the next 3 years (limits of assets &
liabilities).
10. Brief description of deposit insurance scheme of the bank, if any.
11. Training facilities that will be made available to the staff.

B. DOCUMENTS TO BE ENCLOSED

1. Copy of board approved guidelines for conducting offshore banking operation.
2. Copy of Board approval.
3. Certified copy of Memorandum and Articles of Association.
4. Copy of Letter of Authority from supervisory authority approving the bank for
operating Offshore Banking Unit in Bangladesh.
5. Annual Reports, Balance Sheets & Profit loss Accounts of the Bank for the
preceding 3 years.
6. Performance of the other OBUs, if any, for the preceding 3 years operating by the
bank.
7. Organizational Chart of the proposed offshore banking operation.