--- Page 1 ---
৫০০৮০

বাংলাদেশ ব্যাত্ক

(সেন্ট্রাল ব্যাংক অব বাংলাদেশ)
art
মতিঝিল, ঢাকা-১০০০
এ ডেট ম্যানেজমেন্ট ডিপার্টমেন্ট
(প্রাইজবন্ড, সঞ্চয়পত্র ও সঞ্চয়বন্ড শাখা)
সূত্রঃ সার্কুলার লেটার নংঃ ডিএমডি-০২/২০১২ তারিখঃ ০১/০৭/২০১২
বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক এর সকল শাখা অফিসের প্রধান এবং
ব্যবস্থাপনা পরিচালক/প্রধান নির্বাহী
বাংলাদেশের তফসিলি ব্যাংকসমূহ।

The Wage Earner Development Bond Rules, 1981 (Amended upto 30/06/2011),
The US Dollar Premium Bond Rules, 2002 (Amended upto 15/12/2010) এবং

The US Dollar Investment Bond Rules, 2002(Amended upto 15/12/2010) সংশোধন প্রসংগে |

শিরোনামে বর্ণিত বিষয়ে অভ্যন্তরীণ সম্পদ বিভাগ, অর্থ মন্ত্রণালয় এর ৩০/০৬/২০১২ তারিখের ০৮.০৩৬.০০,
০০.০০২.২০১২/২২৫/১৮৮) নং MATA ALT AC ৩০/০৬/২০১২ তারিখের ০৮.০৩৬.০০.০০.০০২.২০১২/২২৫ নং
প্রজ্ঞাপন আপনাদের প্রয়োজনীয় ব্যবস্থা গ্রহনার্থে এবং আপনাদের আওতাধীন তফসিলি ব্যাংকসমূহকে অবহিতকরণের জন্য
এতদৃসংগে প্রেরণ করা VA |

অনুগ্হপূর্বক প্রাপ্তি স্বীকার করবেন |
সতযুক্তি ৪ ০১(এক) | আপনাদের বিশ্বস্ত,
2 nowt
(জয়দেব চন্দ্র বণিক)
উপ পরিচালক

ফোনঃ ৭১২৬১০১-১৪/৩২৯৭

ফোন 8 ৮৮-০২-৭১২৬১০১-২০, ফ্যাক্স ৪ ৮৮-০২-৯৫৬৬২১২, www. bangladeshbank.org.bd

--- Page 2 ---
(পরবর্তী অতিরিক্ত গেজেটে প্রকাশের জন্য)
গণপ্রজাতন্ত্রী বাংলাদেশ সরকার
অর্থ মন্ত্রণালয়
অভ্যন্তরীণ সম্পদ বিভাগ
পরিকল্পনা শাখা

প্রজ্ঞাপন

তারিখ, ৩০ জুন ২০১২/১৬ আষাঢ় ১৪১৯
নং-০৮.০৩৬.০০.০০.০০২.২০১২/২২৫ -সরকার The Wage Earner Development Bond

Rules, 1981 (Amended upto 30/06/2011); The US Dollar Premium Bond Rules,
2002 (Amended upto 15/12/2010) এবং The US Dollar Investment Bond Rules, 2002
(Amended upto 15/12/2010) নিশ্নরূপভাবে অধিকতর সংশোধন করিল, যথাঃ-


The Wage Earner Development Bond Rules, 1981 (Amended
upto 30/06/2011)

ক) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 2 এর Sub-rule (6) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-
rule (6) প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"01766 of Issue’ means the office or branch of a bank that issues the bonds
which must hold Authorized Dealership in Foreign Exchange from
Bangladesh Bank. A Foreign branch, Representative Office, Foreign
Correspondent/Exchange Company of an Authorized Dealer Bank may also
act as an office of issue and any other special booth that the Government
may decide to open for promoting the sale of the Bond;"

খ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 4 এর Sub-rule (1) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-
rule (1) প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-
"4. Maturity, denomination, etc.- (1) The Bond(s) shall mature for
payment on or after five years from the date of its purchase but the Bond-
holder may surrender the Bond(s) and encash the same at the paying office
after six months of purchase when he will be paid the principal amount
together with interest on premature encashment at the rate specified below:-
Premature Encashment Rate of interest payable
(a) Before six months from the date of issue. 139 interest.
(b) On completion of six months but before 8.70% interest for six
one year. months.

10০) On completion of one year but before 1% 9.45% for one year.

years. | ১০...
(0) Oncompletion of 1% years but before two 10.20% for 1% years.
years.
(e) 01) ০0101919001) of two years and thereafter. 11.20% for 4% years.
(f) On completion of five years and 12% (Including 0.80%
thereafter. SSP*)
*SSP-Social Security Premium.”

॥ ৯44

--- Page 3 ---
Note:- Half-yearly interest if drawn for any half-year shall be adjusted from
the amount allowed on the above basis. Social Security Premium will be
available only for redemption on maturity.""

গ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 4 এর Sub-rule (2) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-
rule (2) প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"(2) The Bond-holder will be entitled to draw interest on half-yearly basis
at 12% per annum. Any interest, if not drawn, will be paid with principal
amount on maturity with the benefit of compound interest at 12% on half-
yearly basis."

ঘ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 4 এর Sub-rule (3) এর স্থলে নিল্গুরূপ Sub-
rule (3) প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

" (3) The bond(s) shall be issued in the denominations of Tk. 25,000;
50,000; 1,00,000; 2,00,000; 5,00,000; 10,00,000 and 50,00,000 and in such
other denominations as the Government may decide from time to time."

ঙ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 14 এর Sub-rule(2) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-
rule(2) প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"14. (2) The death-risk benefit will be determined according to the following
slabs:-

mg Investment Death Risk Benefit
(a) For investment between 40% of the Investment;
| __ Tk. 25,000 and Tk. 4,75,000
(b) For Investment between 45% of the Investment;

Tk. 5,00,000 and Tk. 9,75,000
(c) For Investment of Tk. | 50% of the Investment.
_10,00,000 and above

Provided that the maximum amount of death-risk benefit shall not
exceed Tk.5,00,000 and that the age of the wage-earner shall not be over 55
years at the time of his/her death."

চ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 14 এর Sub-rule (3) এর পর নিম্নরূপ Sub-
rule(4) সংযোজিত হইবে-

1(4) Ifa purchaser buys bonds totalling BDT 80,000,000 (Eighty Million) or
above, he/she will be treated as C.I.P. Provided that the C.I.P status of a
Bond holder will be ceased if his/her investment in this bond goes below
BDT 80,000,000 (Eighty Million) because of subsequent encashment and on
his/her failure to attain the limit of BDT 80,000,000 (Eighty Million)
through further investment in the Bond within three months of encashment."

2 Ht

--- Page 4 ---
ছ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 19 এর Sub-rule(2) এর স্থলে নিল্গরূপ Sub-rule(2)
প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

1(2) After being satisfied about the identity and genuineness of the statement of the
applicant, the Paying Office will immediately record the ‘stoppage’ in Stop
Register as well as in the Stop Cards appended in the Issue Register and
Encashment Register and issue an interim ‘Stop Advice’ to the Public Debt Office
for similar action by the latter.

The Paying Office shall simultaneously acknowledge the receipt of the stop
notice to the holder or the nominee concerned with advice to report the loss, theft
or destruction to the local police station and submit a copy of the report
acknowledged by the police station to the Paying Office."

a) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 19 এর Sub-rule(3) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-rule(3)
প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"(3) As soon as the copy of report from the police station regarding loss, theft or
destruction of the bond is received, the correctness thereof will be verified by the
Office of Issue by a reference to the prescribed Issue Register. The Paying Office
will also find out if the requirements as indicated above have been complied with.
The date of acknowledgement of the report from the police station will be entered
in the prescribed Register of Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Bonds. After expiry of two
months from the date of acknowledgement of said report from the police station
and on furnishing a bond of indemnity executed in the prescribed Form, the holder
will be entitled to have a duplicate Bond(s) and the Paying Office will, after fully
satisfying itself, issue the duplicate Bond(s) under advice to its Head Office and
the Public Debt Office. The Bond(s) will be issued under the same serial number
and date and with the same particulars as embodied in the original Bond(s) and the
word “DUPLICATE” shall be recorded in red ink at the right hand top of the
Bond(s) issued in place of the original one. A suitable note regarding the issue of
the duplicate shall be recorded against the Bond number appearing in the Issue
Register as also in the prescribed Stop Register."

ঝ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 19 এর Sub-rule(4) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-rule(4)
প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

1(4) Fees for duplicate Bond:-

(a) Fees in the scale specified below shall be realized while entertaining
report of loss, theft or destruction of Bond(s) requiring issue of duplicate
and in no case this fee shall be refunded:-

For each Bond of Tk. 25,000/-, 50,000/- and | Tk. 100/-

1,00,000/-

| For each Bond of Tk. 2,00,000/- and 5,00,000/-

For each Bond of Tk. 10,00,000/- and | Tk. 500/-

50,00,000/-

Provided that the rate of fee may be changed by the Government from

time to time. "

--- Page 5 ---
The US Dollar Premium Bond Rules, 2002 (Amended upto
15/12/2010)

ক) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 2 এর Sub-rule (5) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-
rule (5) প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

‘Office of Issue’ means the office or branch of a bank that issues the bonds
which must hold Authorized Dealership in Foreign Exchange from
Bangladesh Bank. A Foreign branch, Representative Office, Foreign
Correspondent/Exchange Company of an Authorized Dealer Bank may also
act as an office of issue and any other special booth that the Government
may decide to open for promoting the sale of the Bond;"

খ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 11 এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Rule 11 প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"11. Payment to the heir (5) of the deceased holder:

The heir(s) of the deceased holder of the Bond shall produce the probate of
the will of the holder or the letters of administration of his/her estate or a
succession certificate under the Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925)
within 6(six) months of the death of the holder. In the event of failure to
produce the above document (s) in support of the claims under the bond, the
issuing authority shall pay the sum due on the Bond to the person(s) who
appear(s) to be entitled to receive the same under the law. The heir(s) will be
entitled to draw principal amount, interest and death risk-benefit, if any, in
Bangladesh Currency in case they are residents and principal amount and
death risk-benefit in US Dollar in case they are non-residents."

t) Gafa-Se Rules এর Rule 14 এ Sub-rule (2)(d) নিল্নরূপে সংযোজিত
হইবে-

"(d) In the event of the death of the holder of the Bond, the nominee if
resident shall be entitled to draw the death-risk benefit in Bangladesh Taka.
Provided that death-risk benefit will be payable in foreign exchange if the
nominee is a non-resident."

ঘ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 19 এর Sub-rule (2) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-
rule (2) প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"(2) After being satisfied about the identity and genuineness of the
statement of the applicant, the Paying Office will immediately record the
‘stoppage’ in Stop Register as well as in the Stop Cards appended in the
Issue Register and Encashment Register and issue an interim “Stop Advice’
to the Public Debt Office for similar action by the latter.

The Paying Office shall simultaneously acknowledge the receipt of
the stop notice to the holder or the nominee concerned with advice to report
the loss, theft or destruction to the local police station and submit a copy of
the report acknowledged by the police station to the Paying Office."

4 AS

--- Page 6 ---
ঙ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 19 এর Sub-rule(3) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-
rule(3) প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"(3) As soon as the copy of report from the police station regarding loss,
theft or destruction of the bond is received, the correctness thereof will be
verified by the Office of Issue by a reference to the prescribed Issue
Register .The Paying Office will also find out if the requirements as
indicated above have been complied with. The date of acknowledgement of
the report from the police station will be entered in the prescribed Register
of Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Bonds. After expiry of two months from the
date of acknowledgement of said report from the police station and on
furnishing a bond of indemnity executed in the prescribed Form, the holder
will be entitled to have a duplicate Bond(s) and the Paying Office will, after
fully satisfying itself, issue the duplicate Bond(s) under advice to its Head
Office and the Public Debt Office. The Bond(s) will be issued under the
same serial number and date and with the same particulars as embodied in
the original Bond(s) and the word “DUPLICATE” shall be recorded in red
ink at the right hand top of the Bond(s) issued in place of the original one. A
suitable note regarding the issue of the duplicate shall be recorded against
the Bond number appearing in the Issue Register as also in the prescribed
Stop Register."

চ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 22 এর Sub-rule(a)(i) এর স্থলে নিম্রূপ Sub-
rule (8)(1) প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"22. (a)(i) Commission will be paid to the office of issue at the
following rates :-

“Commission will be paid to the Authorized Dealer Banks/Agents at 0.5%
on the face value of the bond for selling and re-selling/re-issuing the Bonds
abroad respectively and equivalent Bangladesh Taka for selling and re-
selling/re-issuing the Bonds within the country. Bangladesh Bank (BB) may
pay the commission to the Authorized Dealer (AD) banks in Bangladesh
Taka (BDT) within two working days by debiting the appropriate
Government Account;

Provided that the rate of above commission may be changed by the
Government from time to time. "

--- Page 7 ---
The US Dollar Investment Bond Rules, 2002 (Amended upto
15/12/2010)

ক) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 2 এর Sub-rule (4), (5) এবং (6) এর স্থলে EH
Sub-rule (4), (5) এবং (6) প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

1(4) ‘Nominee’ means the person(s) named by the purchaser of the Bond to receive
the amount(s) due against the Bond including the interest accrued and death risk
benefit, if any, in the event of the death of the holder of the Bond; "

(5) ‘Office of Issue’ means the office or branch of a bank that issues the bonds
which must hold Authorized Dealership in Foreign Exchange from Bangladesh Bank.
A Foreign branch, Representative Office, Foreign Correspondent/Exchange
Company of an Authorized Dealer Bank may also act as an office of issue and any
other special booth that the Government may decide to open for promoting the sale
of the Bond:;"

(6) ‘Paying Office’ means the office from which the interest, the principal value and
death risk benefit, if any, and the surrender value of the Bond will be paid."

খ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 4 এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Rule 4 প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

4. Maturity, denomination, ete.

() The U.S. Dollar Investment Bond(s) shall be matured for payment after
completion of three years from the date of its issue. The Bond holder will
be entitled to draw interest on half-yearly basis at 6.5% fixed rate per annum
in U.S. Dollar. However, the Bond holder may surrender the Bond(s)
before maturity and encash the same at the paying office in which case
interest will be paid as under:

Encashment Interest payable

(a) __| Within one year from the date of issue. | No interest.
(b) | After completion of one year but within 5.5%
॥ two years.
(c) | After completion of two years but 6.0%
within three years.
(d) | After completion of 3 years. | 6.5%

In case of premature encashment the Bond holder will be entitled to draw
interest only for the completed one year, for example, if the Bond holder
desires to encash a Bond at the expiry of one year and seven months
he/she will receive the interest for one year only. In that case difference
between the interest drawn earlier and interest admissible under these rules
will be adjusted from the principal, if necessary.

(2) The Bond (5) shall be issued in the denominations of US$500, $1000, $5000,
$10,000 and $50,000 and in such other denominations as the Government

may decide.
e ০

--- Page 8 ---
(3) The purchaser can purchase Bond of any amount in multiples of US$500
without a maximum limit.

(4) For investment of US $10,000 and above, subject to an initial investment of
US$10,000 in one instance, the concerned purchaser will be provided with
death-risk benefit as provided in Rule 14.

(5) The Bond shall not be transferable except as a security for any loan from
any scheduled bank in Bangladesh subject to such conditions as may be
determined by Bangladesh Bank.

(6) The principal and interest will be payable in US Dollar to the holder or

his/her nominee as per rule 9. The principal and interest amount due to the
holder or his/her nominee may also be paid in Bangladesh currency if opted
for by the holder/ nominee.
On maturity, if a holder fails to encash the Bond(s) in his possession, the
principal amount of the Bond(s) shall be treated as reinvested for any
number of terms of three years or repatriated abroad in foreign exchange or
may be credited to the F.C account in accordance with rule 18(4).

(7) The money invested in the purchase of Bond(s) shall be exempt from tax
payable under the Income-Tax act, 1922 (XI of 1922).

(8) The interest accrued/earned on the investment in the Bond(s) shall be free
from income-tax and it shall not be added to the total world income.

(9) After the death of the Bond holder the interest of the Bond will be
accrued/counted till the maturity of the Bond(s).

গ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 7 এর Sub-rule (1) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-rule (1)
প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"(1) The purchaser, where he/she himself/herself is a Foreign currency earner
intending to purchase the Bond shall mention in his/her application, the name and
address of the person who shall be his/her nominee to receive the value of the
Bond, interest payable thereon and the death risk benefit, if any, in the event of
death of the holder."

ঘ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 11 এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Rule 1] প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-
"11. Payment to the heir (5) of the deceased holder:

The heir(s) of the deceased holder of the Bond shall produce the probate of the will
of the holder or the letters of administration of his/her estate or a succession
certificate under the Succession Act, 1925 (XXXIX of 1925) within 6(six) months
of the death of the holder. In the event of failure to produce the above document (s)
in support of the claims under the bond, the issuing authority shall pay the sum due
on the Bond to the person(s) who appear(s) to be entitled to receive the same under
the law. The heir(s) will be entitled to draw principal amount, interest and death
risk-benefit, if any, in US Dollar provided that they are non-residents and in
Bangladesh Currency in case they are residents. "

7 ডি । 2:

--- Page 9 ---
&) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 14 এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Rule 14 এর Sub-rule (1),
Sub-rule (2), Sub-rule (3)(a), (3)(b) ও (3)(c) এবং Sub-rule(4) প্রতিস্থাপিত
হইবে

"14. Additional Benefit for Substantial Investment:

(1) Where a purchaser purchases Bond(s) for at least US$10000 at the first instance
and increases the investment by subsequent addition there to upto his/her death,
he/she will qualify for a free death-risk benefit covering the risk of his/her life.
Provided that the Bond(s) matured before the death of the non-resident account
holder will not count towards determination of the amount of death-risk benefit.

(2) The death-risk benefit will be determined according to the following slabs:-

Investment Death-risk benefit
15% of the Investment
10,000 and US$ 20,000 Taka equivalent);
b) For investment between US$ 20% of the Investment
20.500 and US$ 50,000 (Taka equivalent);

c) For investment US$ 50,500 and) 25% of the Investment
above (Taka equivalent);

Provided that the maximum amount of death-risk benefit shall not exceed
Tk. 20,00,000 and that the age of the purchaser shall not be over 55 years at the
time of his death.

(3) In the case of the death of a holder the death-risk benefit shall be paid in the
following manner:-

(a) The Bond(s) are to be submitted to the Pay Office within a period of 3 (three)
month from the date of death of the holder after which no claim for death-risk
benefit shall be entertained.

(b) The total value of the Bonds submitted under sub-rule 14(1) will determine the
amount on which the death-risk benefit will be paid and the amount of the death-
risk benefit will be calculated on the basis of slabs mentioned in sub-rule 14(2);

(c) In case of death of both the holder and the nominee, the legal heir (s) of the
purchaser will step into the shows of the holder or the nominee, as the case may be,
and the provisions of clause 14(3)(a) will operate mutatis mutandis in determining
the amount of death-risk benefit to be paid and sharing of such benefit.

(d) In the event of the death of the holder of the Bond, the nominee if resident
shall be entitled to draw the death-risk benefit in Bangladesh Taka. Provided that
the death-risk benefit will be payable in foreign exchange if the nominee is a non-
resident.

(4) Ifa purchaser buys bonds totaling US$1,000,000(one million) (Eighty
Million) or above, he/she will be treated as C.I.P. Provided that the C.I.P status of a
Bond holder will be ceased if his/her investment in this bond goes below totaling
US$1,000.000(one million) because of subsequent encashment and on his/her
failure to attain the limit of totaling US$1,000,000(one million) through further
investment in the Bond within three months of encashment. "

. a ag

--- Page 10 ---
চ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 19 এর Sub-rule(2) এর স্থলে নিম্নরূপ Sub-rule(2)
প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"(2) After being satisfied about the identity and genuineness of the statement of the
applicant. the Paying Office will immediately record the ‘stoppage’ in Stop
Register as well as in the Stop Cards appended in the Issue Register and
Encashment Register and issue an interim ‘Stop Advice’ to the Public Debt Office
for similar action by the latter.

The Paying Office shall simultaneously acknowledge the receipt of the stop
notice to the holder or the nominee concerned with advice to report the loss, theft
or destruction to the local police station and submit a copy of the report
acknowledged by the police station to the Paying Office."

ছ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 19 এর Sub-rule(3) 4a wer নিম্নরূপ Sub-rule(3)
প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

"(3) As soon as the copy of report from the police station regarding loss, theft or
destruction of the bond is received, the correctness thereof will be verified by the
Office of Issue by a reference to the prescribed Issue Register .The Paying Office
will also find out if the requirements as indicated above have been complied with.
The date of acknowledgement of the report from the police station will be entered
in the prescribed Register of Lost, Stolen or Destroyed Bonds. After expiry of two
months from the date of acknowledgement of said report from the police station
and on furnishing a bond of indemnity executed in the prescribed Form, the holder
will be entitled to have a duplicate Bond(s) and the Paying Office will, after fully
satisfying itself, issue the duplicate Bond(s) under advice to its Head Office and
the Public Debt Office. The Bond(s) will be issued under the same serial number
and date and with the same particulars as embodied in the original Bond(s) and the
word “DUPLICATE” shall be recorded in red ink at the right hand top of the
Bond(s) issued in place of the original one. A suitable note regarding the issue of
the duplicate shall be recorded against the Bond number appearing in the Issue
Register as also in the prescribed Stop Register."

জ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule 20 এর পর নিম্নরূপ Rule 21 সংযোজিত হইবে-

XI. PAYMENT OF DEATH RISK BENEFIT

21. (1) The initial investment of US $ 10,000 and the amount invested thereafter in
the purchase of the Bond(s) shall be taken into consideration for calculation of
cumulative amount of investment entitled to the death -risk-benefit Smaller sums,
if any, invested prior to the investment of the first US $ 10,000 in one instance
shall be excluded.

(2) The sum assured shall be worked out according to the provisions of these rules.

(3) The benefits under the death-risk-benefit shall accrue only in the event of death
of the holder concerned and it shall relate to the Bond(s) awaiting maturity on the
date of death. If the Bond(s) of initial investment of US $ 10,000 mature earlier,
the subsequent investment shall only be considered for calculation of the assured
sum at the rate applicable on the cumulative amount of his/her investment
beginning after the initial qualifying investment of US $ 10,000;

. st

--- Page 11 ---
(4) In the event of the death of the holder, the nominee and, in the event of the
death of both the holder and the nominee, the heir(s)of the holder shall lodge claim
of the death-risk-benefit in an application supported by the death certificate and the
relevant Bond(s) to the Issuing Authority concerned.

(5) After fulfilling the requirements of rule 14 and after proper scrutiny of the
claims and on due satisfaction on the basis the papers submitted and also on
obtaining the due identification of the claimant(s), the Issuing Authority will
recommend the case to the P.D.O. In the meantime, the Issue Authority shall
obtain an indemnity bond from the claimant (s) and pay the amount to the claimant
(s) in the proportion in which they have interest in the investment involved and
approach the P.D.O. for re-imbursement.

(6) The P.D.O. on being satisfied about the claim shall reimburse the amount to the
Issuing Authority concerned.

ঝ) উপরি-উক্ত Rules এর Rule-21, 22, 23 এবং 24 এর স্থলে যথাক্রমে নিম্নরূপ Rule-
22, 23, 24 এবং 25 প্রতিস্থাপিত হইবে-

XII. COMMISSION PAYABLE TO THE OFFICE OF ISSUE.

"22. (a)(i) Commission will be paid to the office of issue at the following
rates :-

Commission will be paid to the Authorized Dealer Banks/Agents at 0.5%
on the face value of the bond for selling and re-selling/re-issuing the Bonds abroad
respectively and equivalent Bangladesh Taka for selling and re-selling/re-issuing
the Bonds within the country. Bangladesh Bank (BB) may pay the commission to
the Authorized Dealer (AD) banks in Bangladesh Taka (BDT) within two working
days by debiting the appropriate Government Account;

Provided that the rate of above commission may be changed by the
Government from time to time. "

(ii) Selling of the Bond: Upon selling of the Bond, the bank will deposit the sale
proceeds in foreign exchange to BB within two working days. BB will deposit
equivalent Taka to the appropriate government account;

(iii) | Encashment of the Bond: Upon encashment of the Bond, the Authorised
Dealer (AD) bank will pay the value to the bond holder under rule 4 in foreign
exchange or in Taka, at holder's option and will seek reimbursement from the BB
and BB will reimburse within two working days, by debiting the appropriate
government account and settle in foreign exchange where the claim is in foreign
exchange.

(iv) | Reimbursement of interest payments: After payment of interest, the paying

office will seek re-imbursement from BB. BB will reimburse within two working
days by debiting the appropriate government account.

--- Page 12 ---
XIII. THE HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ACCOUNT
TO BE CREDITED/ DEBITED BY P.D.O.

2. The following heads of Government Account will be involved for proper
accounting of the transactions relating to the Bond :

Purpose [ Receipts Head
(a) | Sale proceeds of U.S. Dollar Investment | As allotted by the Ministry of
Bond Finance

(b) | Recoveries of Penal interest for late | As allotted by the Ministry of
deposit of sale proceeds of U.S. Dollar | Finance

Investment Bond.

(c) | Receipts of fees for issue of duplicate | As allotted by the Ministry of

U.S. Dollar Investment Bond etc. Finance
Expenditure Head
(d) | Payment of face value of U.S. Dollar | As allotted by the Ministry of
Investment Bond on maturity Finance

(e) | Payment of interest on half-yearly basis | As allotted by the Ministry of
or with the redemption value of U.S. | Finance

Dollar Investment Bond on maturity

(f) | Payment of commission and management | As allotted by the Ministry of
cost. Finance

(g) | Payment of Death-Risk Benefit. As allotted by the Ministry of
[& Finance

XIV. MAINTENANCE OF RECORD

24. Forms and Registers mentioned in these rules for the administration and
management of issue, encashment, etc. of the Bond(s) will be prescribed by the
P.D.O. except the Application Form. The P.D.O. is hereby empowered to introduce
further Forms and Registers and issue any executive order/orders as and when
considered expedient for the smooth management of the affairs of the Bond and the
Issuing Authority shall comply with the directives of the P.D.O. in this behalf.

XV. FUNCTIONS OF P.D.O.

25. (1) The Public Debt Office shall receive the supply of the copies of
government notifications, rules, application forms and the Bond scrips from
Ministry of Pinance and ensure supply thereof to the Offices of issue through the
Issuing Authority against proper acknowledgement and records.

(2) The control and supervision in the management of sale, encashment, etc. of
the Bond shall rest with the P.D.O. Monthly progressive position of sale shall be

advised by the Issuing Authorities to the P.D.O. by the 10th of the following month
to which the sale relates and the P.D.O. will advise the position to the Government

by the 20th of the same month.

11

--- Page 13 ---
৬০ ২

fu Po.

(3) The expenditure on postage, telegram carriage, cartage and other incidental
matters in connection with the management of the Bond(s) incurred by the P.D.O.
shall be reimbursed by the Government.

(4) The P.D.O. shall be paid a commission of Tk.5000 per one crore per

annum payable half-yearly on the amount of sale as on the 30th June and 3151
December.

৫। জনস্বার্থে জারীকৃত এই আদেশ ০১ জুলাই ২০১২ খ্রিঃ তারিখ হইতে কার্যকর হইবে ।

রাষ্ট্রপতির আদেশক্রমে,
স্বাক্ষরিত/৩০-০৬-২০১২
(ড. নাসিরউদ্দীন আহমেদ)
সচিব
উপ-পরিচালক
বাংলাদেশ সরকারী মুদ্রণালয়,
তেজগাঁও, ঢাকা |

(প্রকাশিত গেজেটের ৫,০০০ কপি অত্র বিভাগে প্রেরণ করার জন্য অনুরোধ করা হইল |)

রি ৩০-০৬-২০১২ খ্রিঃ

নং-০৮.০৩৬.০০.০০.০০২.২০১২/২২৫/১৮) a
০৩- ৪

সদয় অবগতি ও প্রয়োজনীয় ব্যবস্থা গ্রহনের জন্য অনুলিপি প্রেরণ করা হইল ৪-

১। গভর্নর, বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক, ঢাকা |

২। সিনিয়র সচিব, অর্থ বিভাগ, অর্থ মন্ত্রণালয়, বাংলাদেশ সচিবালয়, ঢাকা |

৩। সচিব, ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠান বিভাগ, অর্থ মন্ত্রণালয়, বাংলাদেশ সচিবালয়, ঢাকা ।
81 সচিব, ডাক, তার ও টেলিযোগাযোগ মন্ত্রণালয়, বাংলাদেশ সচিবালয়, ঢাকা |

৫। মহা-পরিচালক, ডাক অধিদপ্তর, বাংলাদেশ ডাক বিভাগ, ঢাকা |

vl (যুগ্[-সচিব), জাতীয় সঞ্চয় পরিদপ্তর, ঢাকা |
মহাব্যবস্থাপক, ডেট ম্যানেজমেন্ট ডিপার্টমেন্ট, বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক, প্রধান কার্যালয়, ঢাকা |
৮। মাননীয় অর্থমন্ত্রীর একান্ত সচিব, অর্থ মন্ত্রণালয়, বাংলাদেশ সচিবালয়, ঢাকা ।

১ _/৬০০ ৬/১২__
(মোঃ কামরুল হাসান খান)
উপ সচিব
ফোনঃ ৯৫৫৪৪৮২