--- Page 1 ---
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh
www.bb.org.bd


Debt Management Department


DMD Circular No. -07
Date: 29 July, 2012

Managing Director/Chief Executive
All scheduled bank companies working in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Rationalization of investment of scheduled banks in Government securities

As per section 33 of Bank Company Act, 1991 (amended up to 2013), the commercial banks
hold Treasury bills(T-Bills) & bonds for maintaining SLR. The holdings of T-Bills & bonds by
Banks are also considered as liquidity coverage against liabilities. At present, T-Bills & bonds are
not distributed rationally among the overall Banking system. For rationalization of such distribution
it has been decided that 60% of unsubscribed amount in auction will be distributed among the
Primary Dealer(PD) Banks and remaining 40% of the unsubscribed amount will be distributed
among the 25 non PD Banks(list shown in Annexure II) until further instructions. It is mentionable
that any bank other than PDs who will buy T-Bills & Bonds in this process, will not be treated as
PD. But non-PD banks (Annexure-II) will get assured liquidity support from Bangladesh Bank like
other PDs as per circular letter no DMD 01/2012 dated 22/02/2012. The new allocation procedure
of T-Bills & Bonds in auction is shown in Annexure-I.

The above circular will come into effect from 1 August, 2012. Circular number 06 dated
24/07/2012 will be replaced by this circular.

Please acknowledge receipt
Yours faithfully,

Sd/-

( Bishnu Pada Saha )
General Manager
Phone: 9530131

--- Page 2 ---
Annexure-I
Allocation Procedure of T-Bills & Bonds in auction
a) Auction of T-Bills & Bonds will be held for notified amount as per pre-announced auction
calendar. The non-PD Banks can also submit bids in auction through PDs.
b) The unsubscribed amount in the auction(if any) shall be distributed among the PDs and Non-PD
banks. Sixty percent(60%) of unsubscribed amount shall be distributed among twelve PDs and
the remaining forty percent(40%) of unsubscribed amount shall be distributed among twenty
five Non-PDs.
c) The half of the distributable amount for PDs will be allocated as per their underwriting
obligation & remaining half will equally be distributed among them. The total demand and time
liabilities(TDTL) of banks that are used for the calculating CRR/SLR, will be considered as
basis to determine underwriting obligation. The total proportion of PDs in the above TDTL will
be converted to 100% and the underwriting obligation will be determined on the monthly basis
according to their individual share in DTL.
d) The distributable amount(40% of unsubscribed portion) for 25 non-PD Banks will be distributed
according to their individual share in DTL which will be determined by using the method
mentioned in paragraph c.
Illustration: The following information of an auction of T-Bills or Bonds may be considered as
an example:
Notified amount
BDT 100 crore
Subscribed amount
BDT 20 crore
Unsubscribed amount
BDT 80 crore
Distributable amount for PDs = 60% of BDT 80 crore, i.e., BDT 48 Crore
Distributable amount for non-PDs = 40% of BDT 80 crore, i.e., BDT 32 Crore
Allocation of distributable amount among PDs
Fifty percent of BDT 48 crore i.e., BDT 24 crore will be distributed among the 12 PDs
according to their underwriting obligation which will be determined on the basis of proportions
in TDTL and the remaining BDT 24 crore will equally be distributed among them.
Allocation of distributable amount among non-PDs
The full distributable amount(BDT 32 crore) will be allocated among 25 non-PD Banks on the
basis of their share in TDTL.
In case of distribution of securities among PD and non-PD banks the cut-off price which is
determined in the auction mentioned in paragraph (a) will be considered as sale value.
e) For the allocation of unsubscribed T-Bills & Bonds, the underwriting obligation for the PDs and
non-PD banks(mentioned in paragraph c) will be communicated in the last week of previous
month of auction.

--- Page 3 ---
Annexure-II
List of Non-PD Banks

Sl No.
Name of Non-PD Banks
Rupali Bank Ltd.
Bank Asia Ltd.
Bangladesh Commerce Bank Ltd.
Brac Bank Ltd.
Dhaka Bank Ltd
Dutch-Bangla Bank Ltd.
Eastern Bank Ltd.
IFIC Bank Ltd.
One Bank Ltd.
10
Premier Bank Ltd.
11
Pubali Bank Ltd.
12
Standard Bank Ltd.
13
The City Bank Ltd.
14
The trust Bank Ltd.
15
United Commercial Bank Ltd.
16
Bank Alfalah Limited
17
City Bank N.A., Bangladesh
18
Commercial bank of Ceylon
19
Habib Bank Ltd.
20
The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation
Limited, Bangladesh (HSBC Bangladesh).
21
National Bank of Pakistan
22
State Bank of India
23
Standard Chartered Bank
24
Woori Bank Ltd.
25
Basic Bank Ltd.