--- Page 1 ---
Department of Financial Institutions & Markets
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

DFIM Circular No-10 Date: 03 October 2021

Chief Executives/Managing Directors
All Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Classification and Provisioning of 'Other Assets' of Financial Institutions

All unadjusted prepaid entries, unadjusted prepaid legal expenses, protested bills and other
expenses/losses are shown as 'Other Assets', although these are not real asset. The instructions for
classification and provisioning of 'Other Assets' are as follows:


a. Unadjusted Prepaid Entries: Any prepaid expenses for salary and allowances, travelling,
entertainment, advertisement and business development etc. remain unadjusted for 12 (twelve) months
or beyond will be classified as 'Bad and Loss' and 100% provision must be maintained.


b. Unadjusted Prepaid Legal Expenses: As there is uncertainty in any unsettled legal actions,
unadjusted expenses related to these legal actions will be classified as 'Doubtful' and 50% provision
must be maintained. For settled legal actions if there remain any unadjusted expenses, these will be
classified as 'Bad and Loss' and 100% provision must be maintained.


c. Protested Bills: Protested Bill is originated from fraud-forgery, robbery, fund embezzlement
and other causes. If there is any possibility of recovery of that Protested Bill, it will be classified as
'Doubtful' in qualitative judgment and 50% provision must be maintained. If there is no possibility of
recovery, it will be treated as 'Bad and Loss' and 100% provision must be maintained.

d. Other Expenses/Losses: Other expenses/losses shown in 'Other Assets' will be classified as
'Bad and Loss' and 100% provision must be maintained.

In terms of the above policies the Financial Institutions will conduct their classification and
provisioning of 'Other Assets' on quarterly basis i.e. 31 March, 30 June, 30 September and 31
December. Financial Institutions will submit Classification and Provisioning Statement of Other Assets
within 30 (Thirty) days after the end of the each quarter in Department of Financial Institutions and
Markets of Bangladesh Bank and upload the same in Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW) of Bangladesh
Bank. Financial Institutions will ensure reflection of the position of other assets classification and
provisioning in Annual Financial Statements with the instructions laid out in this circular.

These instructions will be effective from the quarter ended September 2021.

Instructions provided in section 5.5 of FID Circular No-08, dated-03 August 2002 and template
(FICL 5) for 'Other Assets' attached with FID Circular No-06, dated-20 August 2006 hereby stand
superseded by this circular.
Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours Sincerely,



(Md. Zulkar Nayn)
General Manager
Department of Financial Institutions and Markets
Phone-9530178
Enclosure-01 (One)
Website: www.bb.org.bd

--- Page 2 ---
Ref : DFIM Circular No. 10/2021

CLASSIFICATION AND PROVISIONING OF OTHER ASSETS OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AS OF……..



Page No.
Name of Financial Institution:






(Amount in Taka)






Sl.
No.
Category
of Other Assets
Sub-Category
of Other Assets
Date of
Initiation
DD/MM/YY
Outstanding Balance
as of
Reference Date
Classification
Status
Amount of
Provision
Required
Amount of
Actual
Provision
Surplus/
Shortfall
Remarks
10








































Grand Total