--- Page 1 ---
বাংলাদেশ ব্যাক

(সেন্ট্রীল ব্যাংক অব বাংলাদেশ)
প্রধান কার্যালয় ডেট ম্যানেজমেন্ট ডিপার্টমেন্ট
মতিঝিল, ঢাকা-১০০০
ংলাদেশ।
সলিল সা ২৬ ফেব্রুয়ারি ২০২৬

ব্যবস্থাপনা পরিচালক/প্রধান নির্বাহী কর্মকর্তা
বাংলাদেশে কার্যরত সকল তফসিলি ব্যাংক ও ফাইন্যান্স কোম্পানি |

প্রিয় মহোদয়,
ব্যাংকিং খাতে সুষম তারল্যাবস্থা বজায় রাখার উদ্দেশ্যে বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক কর্তৃক


Guidelines for Open Market Operations’ জারি প্রসঙ্গে।

দেশের মুদ্রাবাজারে স্থিতিশীলতা বজায় রাখা এবং ব্যাংকিং ব্যবস্থার তারল্য ব্যবস্থাপনাকে অধিকতর কার্যকর করার লক্ষ্যে বাংলাদেশ
ব্যাংক কর্তৃক ‘Guidelines for Open Market Operations’ প্রণয়ন করা হয়েছে।

২। প্রণীত গাইডলাইনস্রে মূল উদ্দেশ্য বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক কর্তৃক ব্যাংক ও MIST কোম্পানিসমূহকে স্বল্পমেয়াদি তারল্য সহায়তা প্রদান
ও অতিরিক্ত তারল্য উত্তোলন প্রক্রিয়া স্পষ্টীকরণ এবং একইসাথে আধুনিক ও সমন্বিত কাঠামোর আওতায় উক্ত কার্যক্রম পরিচালনা
করার মাধ্যমে সামগ্রিক মুদ্রানীতি বাস্তবায়ন সহজতর ও সুসংহত করা। এক্ষণে, Open Market 009181105-এর আওতায়
কার্যক্রম সম্পাদনের নিমিত্ত সকল কনভেনশনাল ও শরীয়াহ্‌ ভিত্তিতে পরিচালিত ব্যাংক ও ফাইন্যান্স কোম্পানিকে গাইডলাইনস্টি

৩। এ নির্দেশনা ০৩ মে, ২০২৬ তারিখ হতে কার্যকর AA |

সংযোজনী: বর্ণনা মোতাবেক (৩০ পাতা)। 2 ee
Vet
হোসেন)

ফোন: ৯৫৩০১৩১
ই-মেইল: istequemal.hussain@bb.org.bd

ফোন : ৮৮-০২-৯৫৫০৪৪৮, ৯৫৫৪৮৯৬, আইপি ৪ ৮৮-০২-৫৫৬৬৫০০১-৬, ফ্যাক্স : ৮৮-০২-৯৫৩০৪ ৭৯, Web : www.bb.org.bd

--- Page 2 ---
Guidelines for Open Market Operations










Debt Management Department
Bangladesh Bank
(Central Bank of Bangladesh)

--- Page 3 ---
Table of Contents
1. Objectives ................................................................................................................................................. 1
2. Definition .................................................................................................................................................. 1
3. Instruments of OMOs for Conventional Banks and Finance Companies ................................................. 3
3.1 Repurchase Agreement (Repo) ........................................................................................................... 3
3.2 Standing Lending Facility (SLF) ........................................................................................................ 3
3.3 Operational and Settlement Procedures of Repo and SLF ............................................................. 3
3.4 Additional Terms and Conditions for Repo and SLF ..................................................................... 4
3.5 Standing Deposit Facility (SDF) ........................................................................................................ 6
3.6 Operational and Settlement Procedures of SDF ............................................................................. 6
3.7 Bangladesh Bank Bill (BB Bill) ......................................................................................................... 7
3.8 Operational and Settlement Procedures of BB Bill ........................................................................ 7
4. Instruments of OMOs for Shari’ah Based Banks and Finance Companies .............................................. 8
4.1 Islamic Banks Liquidity Facility (IBLF) ............................................................................................ 8
4.2 Operational and Settlement Procedures of IBLF............................................................................ 9
4.3 Treatment Regarding Breach of Terms of Contract ..................................................................... 10
5. Outright Transactions of Government Securities ................................................................................... 11
6. General Terms and Conditions ............................................................................................................... 12
7. Dispute Resolution .................................................................................................................................. 13
8. Modification of Guidelines ..................................................................................................................... 13
Annexure-1: List of Eligible Securities for OMOs ..................................................................................... 14
Annexure-2: Rollover Procedures ............................................................................................................... 14
Annexure-3: Time Schedule of OMOs ....................................................................................................... 15
Annexure-4: Sample Auction Notice for Outright Sale of Government Securities .................................... 16
Annexure-5: Sample Auction Notice for Outright Purchase of Government Securities ............................ 17
Annexure-6: Sample Auction Notice for Bangladesh Bank Bill ................................................................ 18
Annexure-7: Prescribed Application Form for Manual Submission ........................................................... 19
1. Central Bank Repo Form ................................................................................................................ 19
2. Standing Deposit Facility (SDF) Form .......................................................................................... 20
3. Standing Lending Facility (SLF) Form .......................................................................................... 21
4. Bangladesh Bank Bill (BB Bill) Bid Form .................................................................................... 22
5. Islamic Banks Liquidity Facility (IBLF) Form .............................................................................. 23
Annexure-8: Allotment Process of Liquidity-Absorbing Variable Auction ............................................... 24
Annexure-9: Allotment Process of Liquidity-Providing Variable Auction ................................................ 24
Annexure-10: Accounting Treatment for Collateral-Based Transactions................................................... 25

--- Page 4 ---
List of Acronyms
Acronym
Elaboration
BB
Bangladesh Bank
BB Bill
Bangladesh Bank Bill
BDT
Bangladesh Taka
BGIS
Bangladesh Government Investment Sukuk
CRR
Cash Reserve Ratio
DMD
Debt Management Department
FMI
Financial Market Infrastructure
IBLF
Islamic Banks Liquidity Facility
MPC
Monetary Policy Committee
MTDR
Mudarabah Term Deposit Receipt
OMO
Open Market Operation
PI
Participating Institution
Repo
Repurchase Agreement
RMP
Reserve Maintenance Period
SDF
Standing Deposit Facility
SLF
Standing Lending Facility
SLR
Statutory Liquidity Ratio

--- Page 5 ---
Page | 1

1. Objectives
The purpose of these Guidelines is to clarify and streamline the Open Market Operations
(OMOs) of Bangladesh Bank, encompassing short-term liquidity support and the absorption of
excess liquidity, with a view to ensuring stability in the domestic money market and managing
liquidity in the banking system to facilitate the implementation of monetary policy.
2. Definition
2.1 The following terms, as used in these Guidelines, shall have the meanings indicated below
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
a) Bangladesh Bank Bill (BB Bill) refers to the short-term debt instrument issued by
Bangladesh Bank to mop up excess liquidity from the market;
b) Electronic System refers to the Financial Market Infrastructure (FMI) System or any
other platform introduced or maintained by Bangladesh Bank for conducting OMOs;
c) First Leg Settlement refers to the initial transfer of funds between Bangladesh Bank and
a bank or finance company, effected upon successful completion of the transaction;
d) Haircut refers to the difference between the market value of the collateral and the
amount borrowed or lent against that collateral;
e) Islamic Banks Liquidity Facility (IBLF) refers to a framework for providing short-term
liquidity facility by Bangladesh Bank to Participating Institutions under the Mudarabah
contract where Bangladesh Bank acts as the Investor (Rab-al-Mal) and Participating
Institutions act as the investment manager (Mudarib) on the basis of an agreed Profit
Sharing Ratio (PSR);
f) Open Market Operation (OMO) refers to the liquidity management tools used by
Bangladesh Bank to implement monetary policy, control money supply, and maintain the
stability of interest rates. Instruments under OMOs include the Repurchase Agreement
(Repo), Standing Deposit Facility (SDF), Standing Lending Facility (SLF), Bangladesh
Bank Bill (BB Bill), Outright Transaction of Government Securities, Islamic Banks
Liquidity Facility (IBLF), or any other tools introduced by Bangladesh Bank in this
regard from time to time;
g) Outright Transaction refers to the purchase or sale of Government Securities in the
open market by Bangladesh Bank to control the money supply and maintain liquidity in
the banking system at the desired level;

--- Page 6 ---
Page | 2

h) Repurchase Agreement (Repo) refers to a short-term liquidity arrangement under which
Participating Institutions obtain funds from Bangladesh Bank through the sale of eligible
securities, together with a simultaneous and binding commitment to repurchase the same
or equivalent securities on a specified future date at a predetermined price or rate, being
contractually structured as a sale and repurchase transaction and economically treated as
a collateralized financing arrangement;
i) Reserve Maintenance Period (RMP) refers to the specific timeframe during which
banks and finance companies shall maintain a required level of cash reserves with
Bangladesh Bank to comply with the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) requirement;
j) Second Leg Settlement refers to the final settlement where the original transaction is
reversed along with the agreed-upon interest or profit on the maturity date;
k) Standing Deposit Facility (SDF) refers to the temporary placement of surplus liquidity
by Participating Institutions with Bangladesh Bank without receiving collateral in return,
at a specified rate and date;
l) Standing Lending Facility (SLF) refers to a collateralized borrowing arrangement under
which Participating Institutions obtain overnight liquidity from Bangladesh Bank on a
demand basis against eligible securities, with a commitment to repay at a specified date
and rate.
2.2 All other words and expressions used herein, though not specifically defined, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them under the Bank Company Act, 1991 (up to date), the Sarkari Rin Ain,
2022 (Public Debt Act, 2022) (Act No. 17 of 2022), the Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 (P.O. No.
127 of 1972) (up to date), the Finance Company Act, 2023, and any other applicable laws,
regulations, or standards currently in force.

--- Page 7 ---
Page | 3

3. Instruments of OMOs for Conventional Banks and Finance Companies
Bangladesh Bank (BB) uses various liquidity management instruments to regulate the flow of
funds in the banking system and maintain monetary and financial stability. The Repo and SLF
are employed to inject funds into the system when needed, while the SDF and BB Bill are used
to mop up surplus liquidity from the market. Conventional banks and finance companies that
maintain a current account with BB are eligible to participate in these operations.
3.1 Repurchase Agreement (Repo)
a) Tenor: Overnight (1 day) and 7 days;
b) Operation Schedule: The 7 (seven) days Repo shall be the regular Repo operation and
conducted on each Tuesday. If a Repo operation coincides with a holiday, it shall be
conducted on the next business day;
c) Repo for CRR Maintenance: If there is no regular Repo operation on the end day of the
RMP, an overnight (1 day) Repo operation shall be conducted to facilitate compliance
with CRR maintenance. Unless otherwise notified, the 14th day and the last day of each
month shall be considered as the end day of RMP;
d) Interest Rate: At the policy rate determined from time to time by the Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) of BB for fixed-rate, full-allotment Repo operations.
3.2 Standing Lending Facility (SLF)
a) Tenor: Overnight (1 day);
b) Operation Schedule: SLF shall be conducted on each business day;
c) Interest Rate: As per the rate determined by MPC from time to time.
3.3 Operational and Settlement Procedures of Repo and SLF
3.3.1 First Leg Settlement
a) Application Process: Participating Institutions shall participate in the operations by
applying within the specified timeframe through the electronic system;
b) Application Amount: BDT 1.00 (one) crore or above;
c) Publication of Result: Repo result shall be published in the electronic system within the
specified timeframe;

--- Page 8 ---
Page | 4

d) Settlement Value: The first leg settlement value shall be equal to the market value (clean
price) of the eligible securities after applying haircut;
First Leg Settlement Value = Market Value of Securities × (1-Haircut %)
e) Fund and Securities Settlement of Repo: Based on the result, fund settlement shall be
conducted by crediting the current accounts of the Participating Institutions, while the
securities shall simultaneously be marked as collateralized in favor of BB for the duration
of the Repo period;
f) Automated First Leg Settlement of SLF: Applications for SLF shall be settled
automatically and immediately upon receipt by the electronic system of BB, with
concurrent credit of funds to the Participating Institutions and marking of the securities as
collateralized in favor of BB.
3.3.2 Second Leg Settlement
a) Settlement Value: The first leg settlement value plus applicable interest;
Second Leg Settlement Value=First Leg Settlement Value × (1+
Interest Rate ×Tenor
365
b) Fund and Securities Settlement: On the maturity date, BB shall debit the current
account of the respective institution to recover the second leg settlement value and shall
release the collateralized securities to the respective institution. The Participating
Institution shall ensure that sufficient funds, equivalent to the second leg settlement
value, are available in its current account at maturity.
c) Rollover of Repo: Upon maturity of the existing regular Repo, rollover shall be
permitted, subject to the conditions specified in the annexure.
3.4 Additional Terms and Conditions for Repo and SLF
a) Default Clause:
i) At maturity, if a Participating Institution fails to settle the second leg, BB shall have the
right to enforce its security interest over the collateralized securities, and the legal title
thereof shall be automatically transferred to BB without any further consent from the
Participating Institution;
ii) BB shall have the immediate right to seize, appropriate, and liquidate (sell) the
collateral, or to determine its value in good faith by reference to prevailing market
prices to calculate the close-out amount on the default date. The proceeds shall be
applied to cover the default and any applicable penalty;

--- Page 9 ---
Page | 5

Close-out amount = Market value of collateral (dirty price) − (cash borrowed + interest
amount+ applicable penalties)
iii) Any surplus from the collateral value shall be returned to the institution. Any shortfall
shall be recovered by debiting the institution’s current account with BB, or otherwise
treated as a debt due. The institution shall not be permitted to avail any Repo/SLF
facility from BB until the dues are fully settled;
iv) BB’s rights under this clause including enforcement, close-out, netting, seizure, and
liquidation of collateral under these guidelines shall remain valid, binding and
enforceable notwithstanding the insolvency, liquidation, restructuring, moratorium, or
resolution of a Participating Institution.
b) Penalty for default: In the event of default, the institution shall pay an additional charge
as a penalty for the entire Repo/SLF period. In the case of Repo, the penalty shall be
equivalent to the agreed Repo rate, whereas in the case of SLF, the penalty shall be
equivalent to the agreed SLF rate.

--- Page 10 ---
Page | 6

3.5 Standing Deposit Facility (SDF)
a) Tenor: Overnight (1 day);
b) Operation Schedule: SDF shall be conducted on each business day;
c) Interest Rate: As per the rate determined by MPC from time to time;
3.6 Operational and Settlement Procedures of SDF
3.6.1 First Leg Settlement
a) Application Process: Participating Institutions shall participate in the operations by
applying within the specified timeframe through the electronic system;
b) Applied Amount: BDT 1.00 (one) crore or above. There shall be no upper limit on the
applied amount;
c) Automated First Leg Settlement of SDF: Applications for SDF shall be settled
automatically and immediately upon receipt by the electronic system of BB, with
concurrent debit of funds from Participating Institutions, in order to ensure efficient and
faster processing.
3.6.2 Second Leg Settlement
a) Settlement Value: The first leg settlement value plus applicable interest;
b) Formula for Calculating Settlement Value:
Second Leg Settlement Value=First Leg Settlement Value × (1+
SDF Rate ×Tenor
365
c) Fund Settlement: The second leg settlement of SDF transactions shall be conducted by
crediting the settlement value to the Participating Institutions’ current account on the
maturity date.

--- Page 11 ---
Page | 7

3.7 Bangladesh Bank Bill (BB Bill)
a) Tenor: Standard Monetary Operations shall have a tenor of 7 days, while Structural
Liquidity-Absorbing Operations shall have tenors of 14, 30, 90, and 180 days;
b) Discount/Interest Rate: Auction-determined, but capped at policy rate for Standard
Monetary Operations;
c) Eligibility for Liquidity Support: BB Bill shall be eligible as collateral for availing
liquidity (Repo and SLF) from BB and for conducting Interbank Repo transactions;
d) Tax Treatment: Income tax shall be deducted from discount/interest as per Government
applicable rate.
3.8 Operational and Settlement Procedures of BB Bill
a) Auction Announcement: BB shall issue a notice of BB Bill auction prior to mop up
excess liquidity from the market;
b) Auction Participation: Participating Institutions shall submit bids through the electronic
system;
c) Bid Amount: BDT 10.00 (ten) lac or its multiples;
d) Bidding Procedure: Bids shall reflect the quantity of bills they wish to purchase and the
discount rate (interest rate) they are willing to accept. Separate bids shall be submitted on
each auction, and multiple bids may be submitted in any auction;
e) Publication of Result: The result shall be published in the electronic system within the
specified timeframe after being finalized by the Auction Committee of BB. Participating
Institutions shall have sufficient cash reserves to cover the full amount submitted for the
BB Bill;
f) Issuance and Settlement Process: BB Bill shall be issued at discount, based on the final
result, the settlement shall be done by debiting the current accounts of Participating
Institutions held at BB;
g) Maturity Settlement: At maturity, BB shall pay the face value to the holders by
crediting the current account of the Participating Institutions. If the office is closed due to
a public holiday, the maturity settlement shall occur on the following business day.

--- Page 12 ---
Page | 8

4. Instruments of OMOs for Shari’ah Based Banks and Finance Companies
With a view to managing liquidity within the Islamic banking system in Bangladesh, BB uses
Shari’ah-compliant instruments that strictly adhere to Islamic finance principles, avoiding
interest (riba) and excessive uncertainty (gharar). The Islamic Banks Liquidity Facility (IBLF) is
one of the tools used to inject funds into the Islamic banking system. Shari’ah based banks and
finance companies, as well as Islamic branches or windows of conventional banks and finance
companies that maintain a current account or an al-wadiah current account with BB, are eligible
to participate in these operations.
4.1 Islamic Banks Liquidity Facility (IBLF)
a) Tenor: 7 days;
b) Operation Schedule: IBLF operation shall be conducted on each business day;
c) Provisional Profit Rate:
The profit under IBLF shall be determined based on a pre-agreed profit-sharing
ratio between the BB (Rab-al-Mal) and the Participating Institution (Muḍarib);
ii)
The provisional profit rate of IBLF shall be indicative only, linked to the one-
month Mudarabah Term Deposit Receipt (MTDR) profit rate of the respective
Participating Institution;
iii)
If a one-month MTDR profit rate is not available, the profit rate of the next
higher-tenor MTDR profit rate declared by the respective institution shall be used
as the indicative provisional profit rate for IBLF;
iv)
If an institution declares multiple profit rates for the same tenor product, the
highest rate of that tenor shall be considered as the provisional profit rate for
IBLF;
The final profit shall be adjusted at the end of the calendar year based on actual
realized profit, reported by the Participating Institution. To facilitate this
adjustment, Participating Institutions shall submit their final realized Mudarabah
profit rate to BB at the end of the calendar year;

--- Page 13 ---
Page | 9


4.2 Operational and Settlement Procedures of IBLF
4.2.1 First Leg Settlement
a) Application Process: Participating Institutions shall participate in the operations by
applying within the specified timeframe through the electronic system;
b) Bid Amount: BDT 1.00 (one) crore or above;
c) Publication of Result: The result shall be published in the electronic system within the
specified timeframe;
d) Settlement Value: The first leg settlement value shall be equal to the market value
(clean price) of the securities after applying haircut. If securities do not have an available
market price, then the face value of the securities shall be considered as the market
value;
First Leg Settlement Value = Market Value of Securities × (1-Haircut %)
e) Fund and Securities Settlement: Based on the result, fund settlement shall be
conducted by crediting the current accounts/al-wadiah current accounts of the
Participating Institutions, while the securities shall simultaneously be placed with BB as
collateral for the duration of the IBLF period, to solely secure the Mudarabah capital
against negligence, misconduct, or breach of contract by the Participating Institution.
4.2.2 Second Leg/Maturity Settlement of Investment
a) Settlement Value: The first leg settlement value plus BB’s provisional share of profit, if
any, subject to final determination based on actual realized profit;
Second Leg Settlement Value=First Leg Settlement Value × (1+
IBLF Profit Rate ×Tenor
365
b) Fund and Securities Settlement: On the maturity date, BB shall debit the current
account/al-wadiah current account of the respective institution to recover the investment
amount and the profit (as per the provisional profit rate), and release the collateralized
securities to the respective institution. The Participating Institution shall ensure that
sufficient funds, equivalent to the second leg settlement value, are available in its current
account/al-wadiah current account at maturity.
c) Rollover of IBLF: Upon maturity of the existing IBLF, rollover shall be permitted
subject to the conditions specified in the annexure, provided that the existing Mudarabah

--- Page 14 ---
Page | 10

is first deemed terminated through settlement of provisional profit (if any) and
confirmation that no loss has occurred, and a new and independent Mudarabah contract is
executed thereafter.
4.3 Treatment Regarding Breach of Terms of Contract
a) Default Clause:
i) At maturity, if the institution fails to settle the investment due to negligence,
misconduct, or contractual breach, BB shall have the right to enforce its security
interest over the collateralized securities;
ii) BB shall have the immediate right to seize, and liquidate (sell) the collateral, or to
determine its value in good faith by reference to prevailing market prices on the
default date, solely to recover the outstanding investment capital and any profit
actually realized and distributable as of the date of default, together with actual
enforcement-related cost;
iii) Any surplus from the collateral value shall be returned to the institution. Any shortfall
shall be recovered by debiting the institution’s current account/al-wadiah current
account with BB. Any remaining deficit after such recovery shall be treated as a
liability of the institution. The institution shall not be permitted to avail any IBLF from
BB until such liabilities are fully settled;
iv) BB’s rights under this clause including enforcement, close-out, netting, seizure, and
liquidation of collateral under these guidelines shall remain valid, binding and
enforceable notwithstanding the insolvency, liquidation, restructuring, moratorium, or
resolution of a Participating Institution.
b) Penalty for default: In the event of willful default, negligence, or breach of contractual
obligations, an institution shall pay an additional charge as a penalty for the entire IBLF
period. BB shall calculate a Shari’ah compliant penalty, using the prevailing Policy Rate
as a reference. The penalty shall be debited from the Participating Institution’s current
account/al-wadiah current account, shall not accrue to BB, and shall be transferred in full
to a charity fund ‘Bangladesh Bank Disaster Management and Social Responsibility
Fund’ in accordance with Shari’ah principles.

--- Page 15 ---
Page | 11

5. Outright Transactions of Government Securities
a) Auction Announcement: BB shall announce the outright sale or purchase of
Government Securities through a public notice. The announcement shall specify the types
of securities, the amount to be sold or purchased, and the auction details, including the
date, time, and rules of the transaction;
b) Order Amount: BDT 10.00 (ten) lac or its multiples;
c) Auction Participation: Participating Institutions shall submit orders through the
electronic system;
d) Order Procedure: An order shall include the quantity of Government Securities the
Participating Institution intends to ‘purchase or sell’, and the price (or yield) it is willing
to offer or accept. A separate order shall be submitted for each auction, and multiple
orders may be submitted in any auction;
e) Publication of Result: After finalizing the result by the Auction Committee of BB, it
shall be published in the electronic system within the specified timeframe;
f) Fund and Securities Settlement: Based on the final results, the settlement shall be
executed by appropriately debiting or crediting the Participating Institutions’ current
accounts with BB and simultaneously transferring the corresponding securities from the
seller’s account to the buyer’s account, as applicable to Outright Sales or Purchases.

--- Page 16 ---
Page | 12

6. General Terms and Conditions
a) Day Count Convention: Actual/365 basis;
b) Settlement Cycle: T+0;
c) Treatment of Collateral: While providing the facility, the entire securities shall be
treated as collateralized securities, even if a haircut is applied to their market value at the
prescribed rate. All securities used under the OMOs shall be subject to statutory collateral
marking in favor of BB, with the right of appropriation in the event of default, without
requiring further consent from the counterparty. These collateral securities shall not
qualify as eligible assets for the SLR during the transaction period;
d) Coupon/Profit of Securities in Interim Period: The Participating Institutions shall
receive interim coupon/profit (if any) from securities used as collateral;
e) Restricted Securities: Securities maturing within the Repo/SLF/IBLF tenor shall not be
considered eligible for applications;
f) Use of Securities for Multiple OMO: Participating Institutions shall be permitted to
apply for different OMOs facilities using the same securities, subject to the
unencumbered balance of those securities;
g) Holiday Settlement Adjustment: If BB is closed due to a public holiday, the second leg
settlement shall occur on the following business day. Interest/profit shall be paid from the
day the facility is provided until the settlement date;
h) Holiday Treatment of RMP: If BB is closed due to a public holiday at the end day of
RMP, then the fine-tuning operation shall be conducted on the previous working day;
i) Debit/Credit Authority of BB: BB shall have the authority to debit and credit the
current account/al-wadiah current account and securities accounts of Participating
Institutions in respect of OMOs;
j) Manual Application: In exceptional circumstances, where submission of electronic
applications is not possible, manual applications for Repo, SDF, SLF, BB Bill, and IBLF
may be submitted to the BB, Motijheel office in prescribed form (see Annexure) within
the specified timeframe;
k) Details of Authorized Officials: Participating Institutions interested in conducting
OMOs under these guidelines shall provide BB with the necessary information regarding
authorized officials (e.g., name, telephone number, e-mail address, sample signature,
etc.);

--- Page 17 ---
Page | 13

l) Replacement of Existing Circulars and Directives: All previous policies, guidelines,
circulars, and circular letters issued by the relevant department regarding Central Bank
Repo, Special Repos/SLF, Reverse Repos/SDF, BB Bill and IBLF shall be deemed
replaced by the directives of these guidelines.
7. Dispute Resolution
Any dispute arising regarding the OMOs shall be resolved by BB in accordance with applicable
laws and regulations.
8. Modification of Guidelines
BB may modify, extend, add, or remove relevant policies and procedures related to OMOs, as
deemed necessary.

--- Page 18 ---
Page | 14

Annexure-1: List of Eligible Securities for OMOs
The following unencumbered marketable securities, including such other securities as may be
declared eligible by BB from time to time, shall be accepted as collateral for the respective OMO
facilities, subject to the applicable haircuts:
Instruments
Eligible Securities
Applicable Haircut
Repo and SLF
Treasury Bills (T-Bill)
Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds (BGTB)
Bangladesh Bank Bill (BB Bill)
IBLF
Bangladesh Government Investment Sukuk (BGIS)
Annexure-2: Rollover Procedures
At the maturity of 7 days Repo and IBLF, rollover shall be permitted upon application by the
Participating Institution, subject to compliance with the following conditions:
a) Participating Institutions shall submit their request for rollover within the stipulated
timeframe. Requests received after the stipulated cut-off time shall not be considered;
b) The Participating Institution shall, on the maturity date, fully settle all accrued
interest/profit due to BB as Rab-al-Mal on the maturing transaction prior to consideration
of rollover;
c) BB shall conduct a new mark-to-market valuation of the collateral securities and apply
the applicable haircut to determine the revised borrowing/investment limit;
d) Any shortfall or excess arising from revaluation and haircut adjustments shall be settled
through the Participating Institution’s current account/al-wadiah current account with BB
on the same day;
e) Upon settlement of the interest/agreed-upon profit share and valuation process, the new
Repo/IBLF shall be initiated as a rollover transaction under the applicable OMO terms,
reflecting any adjustments to the interest rate/agreed-upon profit share based on actual
performance;
f) If the Participating Institution fails to settle accrued interest/agreed-upon profit share,
valuation differences, or provide eligible collateral within the prescribed timeframe, the
rollover request shall be rejected and the maturing transaction shall be fully settled;

--- Page 19 ---
Page | 15

g) For 7 days Repo transactions, if the second leg settlement falls on a holiday and the
transaction is rolled over, the new Repo transaction shall mature on the next scheduled
regular Repo operation day (e.g., a rollover Repo initiated on Wednesday shall be settled
on next Tuesday);
h) Rollover of 7 days Repo and IBLF transactions shall not exceed two (02) consecutive
occurrences.
Annexure-3: Time Schedule of OMOs
The submission of applications/bids and the announcement of results for OMOs shall be
conducted as follows, or as specified by BB from time to time:





Sl.
Instruments
Submission Time
Result
Publication
Time
Settlement Time
Central Bank Repo
10:00 am - 3:00 pm
3:30 pm
1st leg: 4:30 pm
2nd leg: 1:00 pm
(Rollover/Settlement)
SLF
10:00 am- 5:00 pm
1st leg: Continuous basis
2nd leg: 1:00 pm
(Settlement)
SDF
10:00 am - 5:00 pm
1st leg: Continuous basis
2nd leg: At the start of the day
BB Bill
10:00 am - 12:30 pm
2:30 pm
4:00 pm
Outright Buy-Sell
10:00 am - 12:30 pm
2:30 pm
4:00 pm
IBLF
10:00 am - 3:00 pm
3:30 pm
1st leg: 4:30 pm
2nd leg: 1:00 pm
(Rollover/Settlement)

--- Page 20 ---
Page | 16

Annexure-4: Sample Auction Notice for Outright Sale of Government
Securities
To permanently absorb excess liquidity from the banking system, BB proposes an outright sale
of government securities held in its portfolio. The terms and conditions of the auctions are as
follows:
Auction Date

Auction Type
Multiple Price Auction
Securities Details
1) Type: Treasury Bond / Treasury Bill/BGIS
2) ISIN:
3) Notified Amount:
4) Maturity Date(s): As per security details
5) Coupon / Discount/Profit Rate: As applicable
Eligibility

For Treasury Bond / Treasury Bill:
Conventional banks and finance companies maintaining current accounts with
BB.
For BGIS:
Shari’ah based banks and finance companies, and the Islamic branches or
windows of conventional banks and finance companies maintaining current
accounts or al-wadiah current accounts with BB.
Bid Submission
Time
Bid shall be submitted electronically through the FMI system between 10:00 am
and 12:30 pm on the auction day.
Bid Terms
1) Participating Institutions shall bid/quote the price (clean price) for every
BDT 100 face value of the securities.
2) Bid Size: BDT 10.00 lac or its multiples.
3) Multiple bids are permitted.
Payment and
Settlement
Fund settlement shall be conducted by debiting the current accounts or al-wadiah
current accounts of the Participating Institutions held at BB. Simultaneously, the
sold securities shall be transferred to the Participating Institution.
Other Terms &
Conditions
Successful Participating Institutions shall pay the respective bid price and
accrued interest/profit on the nominal value of the securities allotted in the
auction, calculated from the issue date.

Interested participants shall submit their bids through the Bangladesh Bank Financial Market
Infrastructure (FMI) system within the specified timeframe on the date of auction. Separate bids
must be submitted for different prices. The results will be announced by 2:30 p.m. on the same
day. Submission of bids in the auction shall be treated as authorization for Bangladesh Bank to
debit the Participating Institutions’ current accounts or al-wadiah current accounts and credit the
securities account. Accordingly, Participating Institutions are advised to ensure that bids are
submitted by their authorized officials.

Your faithfully,


Director (DMD)

--- Page 21 ---
Page | 17

Annexure-5:
Sample
Auction
Notice
for
Outright
Purchase
of
Government Securities
To permanently provide liquidity in the banking system, BB proposes an outright purchase of
government securities from the market participants. The terms and conditions of the auctions are
as follows:
Auction Date

Auction Type
Multiple Price Auction
Securities Details
1) Type: Treasury Bond / Treasury Bill/BGIS
2) Notified Amount:
Eligibility

For Treasury Bond / Treasury Bill:
Conventional banks and finance companies maintaining current accounts with
BB.
For BGIS:
Shari’ah based banks and finance companies, and the Islamic branches or
windows of conventional banks and finance companies maintaining current
accounts or al-wadiah current accounts with BB.
Offer Submission
Time
Offer shall be submitted electronically through the FMI system between 10:00 am
and 12:30 pm on the auction day.
Offer Terms
1) Participating Institutions shall submit offers for the outright sale of
Government Securities from their holdings:
a) specifying the quantity they are willing to sell;
b) the price at which they want to sell the securities.
2) Offer Size: BDT 10.00 lac or its multiples.
3) Multiple offers are permitted.
4) Separate offers must be submitted for different prices.
Payment and
Settlement
Fund settlement shall be conducted by crediting the current accounts or al-wadiah
current accounts of the Participating Institutions held at BB. Simultaneously, the
sold securities shall be transferred to the BB.
Other Terms &
Conditions
Successful Participating Institutions shall receive the respective offer price and
accrued interest/profit on the nominal value of the securities sold in the auction,
calculated from the issue date.

Interested participants shall submit their offers through the Bangladesh Bank Financial Market
Infrastructure (FMI) system within the specified timeframe on the date of auction. Separate
offers must be submitted for different prices. The results will be announced by 2:30 p.m. on the
same day. Submission of offers in the auction shall be treated as authorization for Bangladesh
Bank to credit the Participating Institutions’ current accounts or al-wadiah current accounts and
debit the securities account. Accordingly, Participating Institutions are advised to ensure that
offers are submitted by their authorized officials.

Your faithfully,


Director (DMD)

--- Page 22 ---
Page | 18

Annexure-6: Sample Auction Notice for Bangladesh Bank Bill
According to Circular No. ‘Guidelines for Open Market Operations’ by Debt
Management Department of Bangladesh Bank, the auctions for will be held on .
The main features of the BB Bill and the auction procedures are as follows.
Auction Method
and Type
Multiple-price auction (competitive bids) will be conducted through the BB’s
electronic platform (FMI System).
Bidding Time
Eligible participants shall submit bids electronically through the FMI system
between 10:00 am and 12:30 pm on the auction day. Manual (sealed-cover) bids
may be submitted to the concerned department if technical issues occur.
Bid Terms
The face value of each bill is BDT 100.00;
Bids must specify the offer price per BDT 100 face value;
Separate bids shall have to be submitted for different prices.
Eligibility
All conventional banks and finance companies maintaining current accounts with
Bangladesh Bank.
Settlement Time Successful bids will be settled through participants’ accounts maintained with
Bangladesh Bank on the same day.
Discount Rate
The bills will be issued and redeemed at a discount
Transferability
Freely tradable and transferable
In exceptional situations such as system failure, bids can be submitted using the manual system
(bids in sealed covers) with prior approval from Debt Management Department. The bids will be
opened at 12.30 pm and the results will be announced by 02.30 pm on same day. The bids
submitted in the auction will be considered as the letter of authorization of the Participating
Institutions to debit their current accounts maintained with Bangladesh Bank. Therefore,
concerned Participating Institutions are advised to submit bids through their responsible officials.


Your faithfully,

Director (DMD)

--- Page 23 ---
Page | 19

Annexure-7: Prescribed Application Form for Manual Submission
1. Central Bank Repo Form
Date:
Executive Director
Bangladesh Bank
Motijheel Office
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Dear Sir,
Subject: Application for Central Bank Repo.
We, the undersigned, hereby request the BB to conduct a Central Bank Repo transaction on our
behalf under the terms specified below:
1. Transaction Date

2. Requested Amount

3. Applicable Interest Rate and Tenor

Details
of
Eligible Securities
used for Repo
T-Bill
ISIN:

Total Market Value:

Value after applying haircut:

T-Bond

ISIN:

Total Market Value:

Value after applying haircut:

5. First Leg Settlement Value

6. Second Leg Settlement Value

We certify that the above information is accurate and complete. We agree to comply with all
applicable regulations and terms regarding this transaction.







Authorized Officer's Name, Designation,
Signature and Seal

--- Page 24 ---
Page | 20

2. Standing Deposit Facility (SDF) Form
Date:
Executive Director
Bangladesh Bank
Motijheel Office
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Dear Sir,
Subject: Application for Standing Deposit Facility (SDF).
We, the undersigned, hereby request the BB to conduct a SDF transaction on our behalf under
the terms specified below:











We hereby authorize you to deduct the funds received from our current account as per the
application. We agree to comply with all applicable regulations and terms regarding this
transaction.





Authorized Officer's Name, Designation,
Signature and Seal











1. Transaction Date

2. Bid Amount

3. Maturity Date

4. Applicable Interest Rate

5. First Leg Settlement Price

6. Second Leg Settlement Price

--- Page 25 ---
Page | 21

3. Standing Lending Facility (SLF) Form
Date:
Executive Director
Bangladesh Bank
Motijheel Office
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Dear Sir,
Subject: Application for Standing Lending Facility (SLF).
We, the undersigned, hereby request the BB to conduct a Standing Lending Facility (SLF)
transaction on our behalf under the terms specified below:
1. Transaction Date

2. Requested Amount

3. Applicable Interest Rate and Tenor

Details
of
Eligible Securities
used for SLF
T-Bill
ISIN:

Total Face Value:

Total Market Value:

Value after applying haircut:

T-Bond

ISIN:

Total Face Value:

Total Market Value:

Value after applying haircut:

5. First Leg Settlement Value

6. Second Leg Settlement Value


We certify that the above information is accurate and complete. We agree to comply with all
applicable regulations and terms regarding this transaction.







Authorized Officer's Name, Designation,
Signature and Seal

--- Page 26 ---
Page | 22

4. Bangladesh Bank Bill (BB Bill) Bid Form
Date:
Executive Director
Bangladesh Bank
Motijheel Office
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Dear Sir,
Subject: Application for Submission of Bid for BB Bill.
We, the undersigned, hereby request to submit bid for BB Bill on our behalf under the terms
specified below:
1. Transaction Date

2. Tenor

3. Bid Amount (in Crore BDT)

4. Offer Price/Rate

On acceptance, we hereby authorize BB to debit our current account maintained with BB for
settlement. We agree to comply with any decisions taken by the Auction Committee of BB.





Authorized Officer's Name, Designation,
Signature and Seal

--- Page 27 ---
Page | 23



5. Islamic Banks Liquidity Facility (IBLF) Form
Date:
The Executive Director
Bangladesh Bank
Motijheel Office
Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Dear Sir,
Subject: Request for IBLF.
With reference to the DMD Circular No.

Dated
we, hereby apply for funds
under IBLF as per details given below:
Rab-al-Mal (Partner 1): Bangladesh Bank (BB)
Mudarib (Partner 2): .

A. Details of the eligible collateral
1.Security Type

2.Security
Details


ISIN:

Total Face Value:

Total Market Value:

Value after applying haircut:

B. Details of fund
1. Transaction Date

2. Requested/Financing amount

3. Amount in words

4. Tenor of IBLF

5. Fund to be credited to Account No

6. Existing profit sharing ratio applicable for
current Mudarabah Term Deposit Receipt

7. Expected Profit Rate (attach rate sheet)

8. Expected Profit Amount

9. Total amount payable to BB at maturity
(Financing amount +Expected Profit amount)


a) We hereby authorize BB to mark the securities as collateralized as per the details provided above. We
further authorize BB to credit our Current Account/Al-Wadiah Current Account with the allotted amount
and to debit the same account for settlement at maturity.
b) In the event that we fail to maintain adequate funds in our Current Account/Al-Wadiah Current Account for
the settlement of IBLF at maturity due to negligence, misconduct, or breach of contractual obligations, BB
is authorized to adjust the investment capital and any profit actually realized and distributable by disposing
of the collateralized securities.
c) We shall be liable to pay any penalty imposed on us by BB in the event of willful default, negligence or
breach of contract.
Yours faithfully,

Authorized Name & Signature
with Seal/Rubber Stamp

--- Page 28 ---
Page | 24

Annexure-8: Allotment Process of Liquidity-Absorbing Variable Auction
In a liquidity absorbing variable rate auction (such as BB Bill, Outright Sale), allotment of bids
submitted by eligible counterparties shall be made in accordance with the following procedures:
1. Bids shall be arranged in ascending order of offered interest/profit rates or, where
applicable, in descending order of offered prices;
2. Bids quoting the lowest interest/profit rates shall be satisfied first, followed by bids at
successively higher interest/profit rates, until the total amount of liquidity to be absorbed
is exhausted;
3. If the aggregate amount of bids at the cut-off interest/profit rate exceeds the remaining
amount available for allotment, the remaining amount shall be allotted on a pro-rata basis
among those bids, in proportion to each bid amount relative to the total bids at the cut-off
rate;
4. The amount allotted to each Participating Institution shall be rounded to the nearest BDT.
Annexure-9: Allotment Process of Liquidity-Providing Variable Auction
In a liquidity-providing variable rate auction (such as Outright Purchase), the bids of
counterparties shall be allotted in the following manner:
1. Bids shall be arranged in descending order of offered interest/profit rates or, where
applicable, in ascending order of offered prices;
2. Bids quoting the highest interest/profit rates shall be satisfied first, followed by bids at
successively lower interest/profit rates, until the total amount of liquidity to be provided
is exhausted;
3. If the aggregate amount of bids at the cut-off interest/profit rate exceeds the remaining
amount available for allotment, the remaining amount shall be allotted on a pro-rata basis
among those bids, in proportion to each bid amount relative to the total bids at the cut-off
rate;
4. The amount allotted to each Participating Institution shall be rounded to the nearest BDT.

--- Page 29 ---
Page | 25

Annexure-10: Accounting Treatment for Collateral-Based Transactions
Notwithstanding the contractual structure describing the transaction as a sale and subsequent
repurchase, Central Bank Repo transactions conducted under these guidelines shall, for all
accounting, prudential, risk management, regulatory, and insolvency-related purposes, be treated
as collateralized borrowing arrangements, similar to the SLF and IBLF. Under such
arrangements, the Participating Institution (PI) shall retain the economic ownership of, and
substantially all risks and rewards associated with, the underlying securities, subject to BB’s
security interest therein. Accordingly, securities provided as collateral by a PI to obtain liquidity
shall not be derecognized from the PI’s balance sheet. The cash received shall be recorded as a
borrowing liability/investment received, adjusted for any applicable haircut, with no separate
margin receivable recognized. The collateralized securities shall remain on the PI’s balance sheet
for the tenor of the transaction and shall be derecognized only in the event of default, upon BB
exercising its right of seizure.
1. Accounting Instructions for Participating Institutions:
a) Retention on Books: Collateralized securities shall remain on the borrower’s (PI’s) books
(HTM at amortized cost, HFT at fair value) and shall be disclosed in the financial
statement notes as ‘Collateralized Securities under Repo/SLF/IBLF’. Upon entering the
first leg, the securities shall be reclassified from unencumbered to encumbered securities,
and therefore shall not qualify for SLR purposes during the encumbrance period;
b) Cash and Liability Recording: The borrower (PI) shall record cash received as an inflow
with a corresponding Repo/SLF/IBLF liability, equal to the market value of the
collateralized security (after haircut) i.e. first leg settlement value;
c) Maturity Settlement: Upon maturity, the borrower (PI) shall repay the Repo/SLF
liability/IBLF investment amount along with interest/profit. No re-entry of securities shall
be required;
d) Revaluation during Repo/SLF/IBLF Period: The borrower (PI) shall continue normal
accounting treatment of securities, whereas the lender (BB) shall not record the securities
and shall have no revaluation;
e) Coupon/Profit-Bearing Securities: The borrower (PI) shall continue accruing
coupon/profit, while the lender (BB) shall record only a loan/investment and shall not
accrue coupon/profit;
f) Non-Coupon/Profit-Bearing Securities: For non-coupon/profit-bearing securities, the
borrower (PI) shall maintain normal HFT or HTM treatment, while the lender (BB) shall
not recognize the securities and shall record no revaluation;

--- Page 30 ---
Page | 26

g) Default Accounting Treatment: In the event of default upon formal seizure of securities
by lender (BB) at maturity, the borrower (PI) shall derecognize the collateralized security
only to the extent of loss realized (including penalty amount in case of Repo and SLF) and
shall reflect any shortfall recovery or surplus return in their books.
2. Journal Entries for Participating Institutions
a) At First Leg (T+0)
i) Recognition of cash and borrowing liability: Cash received against collateralized securities
shall be recorded as a liability. The securities shall remain on the balance sheet (with the lien
disclosed off-balance sheet).
Debit
Credit
Balances with Bangladesh Bank
Collateralized Borrowing Liability/Investment
Received
Securities remain on balance sheet (disclosed in footnotes)
ii) Reclassification of collateralized securities: Upon entering the first leg, the securities shall
be reclassified from Unencumbered to Encumbered Securities, and therefore shall not qualify
for SLR purposes during the encumbrance period.
Debit
Credit
Encumbered Government Securities
Investment in Government Securities
b) Interest/Profit Accrual (Reporting day/Maturity)
At the reporting date and/or at maturity, the PI shall accrue the interest or profit expense arising
from Repo/SLF/IBLF transactions by recognizing the corresponding payable.
Debit
Credit
Interest/Profit on borrowing
Interest/Profit Payable on borrowing
c) At Maturity (Second Leg Settlement)
i) Second Leg Settlement: At maturity, the PI shall repay the liability along with the interest
or profit agreed under the collateral arrangement. The collateral securities shall be released
with no accounting entry, as they shall never have been derecognized.
Debit
Credit
Collateralized Borrowing Liability/ Investment Received
Balances with Bangladesh Bank
Interest/Profit Payable on borrowing
(Footnote disclosure updated)

--- Page 31 ---
Page | 27

ii) Re-classification of collateralized securities: At maturity, the securities shall be
reclassified from Encumbered to Unencumbered Securities, and therefore shall be qualified
for SLR purposes.
Debit
Credit
Investment in Government Securities
Encumbered Government Securities
d) In case of Default (Failure to Settle Second Leg)
If the PI fails to repay the borrowing (second leg), the collateralized securities shall be seized and
derecognized. The accounting treatment shall depend on the relationship between the market
value of the securities and the collateralized borrowing liability.
i) When Government Securities Market Value = Collateralized Borrowing Liability: If the
collateral value fully covers the liability, no gain or loss shall arise. No additional entry
shall be required, as the liability shall be exactly offset by the collateral value.
Debit
Credit
Collateralized Borrowing Liability
(Repo/SLF: including interest and penalty)/
(IBLF: including profit)
Government Securities
(derecognized upon seizure)
(Footnote disclosure updated)
ii) When Government Securities Market Value < Collateralized Borrowing Liability: If the
collateral value is insufficient, a loss equal to the shortfall amount shall be recognized. The
loss shall represent the portion of the liability that cannot be recovered from the seized
securities.
Debit
Credit
Collateralized Borrowing Liability
(Repo/SLF: including interest and penalty)/
(IBLF: including profit)
Government Securities (derecognized upon
seizure)
Credit Loss/Impairment Loss
(Loss recognized)
Balances with Bangladesh Bank (Shortfall
returned to BB)
iii) When Government Securities Market Value > Collateralized Borrowing Liability: If the
collateral exceeds the liability, the surplus cash shall be returned to the PI.
Debit
Credit
Collateralized Borrowing Liability
(Repo/SLF: including interest and penalty)/
(IBLF: including profit)
Government Securities
(derecognized upon seizure)
Balances with Bangladesh Bank
(Surplus cash returned to PI)