--- Page 1 ---
(50080)

Telegraph : Banglabank

Telephone : 7126101-20

Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
Post Box No.325
Agriculture Credit & Specials
Programs Deptt.
ACSPD Circular No. 01 Dated:02/05/04.

All Scheduled Banks/
Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Refinance Scheme for Small Enterprises Sector
To help employment generation through growth and development of small enterprise
sector of the country, Bangladesh Bank has undertaken a scheme with a special fund of taka one
hundred crore to provide refinance to banks and financial institutions against lending to small
entrepreneurs. The main features and terms conditions of the scheme are as follows:

An enterprise having fixed assets not exceeding taka one crore will be considered as a
small enterprise for the purpose of the scheme.
Banks and financial institutions will be given 100% refinance against disbursement of
both working capital and term loans to the small enerprise sector; the amount for an
individual borrower shall range from taka 2.00 lac to taka 50.00 lac. Refinance will be
available on| 'first come first serve basis'.
Interest on Bangladesh Bank refinance will be charged at prevailing Bank rate. The
lending banks or financial institutions will apply their own interest rate on the loans made
to the ultimate borrowers.
Banks and financial institutions will apply for refinance to Bangladesh Bank in the
prescribed forms against disbursement of loans on quarterly basis.
Banks and financial institutions interested to obtain refinance facility under the scheme
will submit a statement to Bangladesh Bank forcasting a realistic projection of fund requirement
over a six month period.

Refinance will be available for short term working capital loans as well as for medium
and long term loans. Working Capital loans will have a maximum maturity period of one year

--- Page 2 ---
while medium and long term loans will have maximum maturities of three years and five years
respectively.

7. Refinance loan received by banks and financial institutions from Bangladesh Bank will
have the following repayment schedule :
Working capital loan: Repayable within one year from the date of disbursement in two
equal half yearly instalments with interest.
Medium term loan: Repayable within three years including six months grace period in
five equal half yearly instalment with inerest.
Long term loan: Repayable within five years including six months grace period in nine
equal half yearly instalments with interest.

If any bank or financial institution fails to repay any instalment of the outstanding loan as
per aforementioned repayment sehedule, Bangladesh Bank will realise the instalment amount
with interest by debiting the current account of the concerned bank or financial institution
maintained with Bangladesh Bank.

Decision regarding borrower selection, loan sanction, debt equity ratio, margin
requirement, supervision of loan utilization etc. will be taken by the lending banks/institutions
themselves on the basis of their own rules and practices as well as on the basis of banker-
customer relationship. Repayment of outstanding refinance loan to Bangladesh Bank will not be
contingent on the lending institutions' recovery of loans from the borrowers.
10.
Banks and financial institutions having more than 10% classified loans on their small
loans portfolio (covering loan accounts upto taka 50.00 lac) will not be eligible for refinance
under the scheme.
11.
Refinance facility under the scheme will not be applicable for personal or consumer
loans.
12.
Banks and financial institutions those are interested to avail of refinance facility under the
scheme will have to enter into a participation agreement with Bangladesh Bank..The refinance
loan sanctioned in favour of a bank or a financial institution will be released on production of a

--- Page 3 ---
Demand Promissory note and other usual documents by the concerned bank or financial
institution to Bangladesh Bank.
13.
If any bank or financial institution receives refinances under the scheme on the basis of
statement or information which may subsequently prove to be false or incorrect, it will be liable
to pay penalty to Bangladesh Bank at the rate of 5% above the Bank Rate on the refinanced
amount.

14.
Banks or financial institutions will furnish statements/information in the form and
manner as called for by Bangladesh Bank regarding utilisation of the refinance facility.
15.
Refinance under the scheme will be applicable for loan and advances sanctioned and
disbursed after the date of issuance of this Circular.

Bank and financial institutions interested to apply for refinance facilities under the
scheme are advised to collect the prescribed application form along with the formats of
participation agreement and Demand Promissory note from the Agricultural cultural Credit
Department of Bangladesh Bank.

Meanwhile, please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faithfully

(Nitai Das Saha)
General Manager
Phone: 7120947