--- Page 1 ---
BANGLADESH BANK
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh
Website: www.bb.org.bd


Department of Off-site Supervision



10 Magh 1429
DOS Circular Letter No. 03 Date: -------------------------
24 January 2023

Managing Director/Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh.


Dear Sir,

Introduction of new Input Template for Comprehensive Risk Management Report (CRMR)


Please refer to DOS Circular No. 04 dated 08 October 2018 on the captioned subject. As per this
circular, banks are required to submit half-yearly CRMR along with other documents to Bangladesh Bank
(BB).
2. It is noticed that banks have been submitting their CRMRs in different file formats (e.g., MS
Word, MS Excel, pdf, etc.) which make the extraction of required data and analysis of risk management
ratings more strenuous and time-consuming at BB’s end. Therefore, with a view to circumvent such
complexity and facilitate uniformity in reporting formats, an Excel-based data input template has been
developed.
3. Banks are now advised to submit the required data in the excel-based data input template
(copy attached) on half-yearly basis (i.e. end of June and December) to DOS of BB (e-mail:
rmmcms.dos@bb.org.bd), in addition to the documents listed in the aforementioned circular.
4. Banks are also advised to replace the existing data tables in the CRMR with the data tables
provided in this excel-based input template and to carry out their risk analysis accordingly. Besides, banks
may also supplement the risk analysis in the CRMR by including any other issues they consider important
and relevant to their own risk profile.
5. In this regard, the submission time frame for the required documents will be replaced as
follows:
Sl. No.
Document types
Submission deadline
Half-yearly excel-based data input template
Within 31st July and 31st January respectively
CRMR prepared for June & December
Within 10th August & 10th February respectively
Half-yearly Stress Test report
Along with half-yearly CRMR
Monthly Risk Management Report (MRMR)
Within next month of the reporting period

--- Page 2 ---
BANGLADESH BANK
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh
Website: www.bb.org.bd


Department of Off-site Supervision



Sl. No.
Document types
Submission deadline
Monthly ERMC meeting minutes
Within 7 days of the meeting held
BRMC meeting minutes
Within 7 days of the meeting held
Yearly Board approved Risk Appetite Statement (RAS)
Within first 2 months of the year
Board approved review report of Risk Management Policies
and effectiveness of risk management functions
Within first 2 months of the year

6. All other instructions provided vide DOS Circular No. 04, dated 08 October 2018 will remain
unchanged.
This circular letter shall come into force with immediate effect.



Yours sincerely,

(Arief Hossain Khan)
Director (DOS)
Phone: 88-9530093


Enclosure: As above