--- Page 1 ---
Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka




BRPD Circular No. 11


27 October, 2013
Date: ----------------------
12 Kartik, 1420












Chairman, Board of Directors/CEO
All banks incorporated in Bangladesh.

Dear Sir:

Formation & Responsibilities of Board of Directors of a Bank Company.


Board of Directors of a bank should be comprised with competent and professionally
skilled persons with a view to formulating policy-guidelines and supervising business
activities o0f the bank efficiently as well as ensuring good governance in the bank
management. The responsibilities of the board of directors of a bank-company are more
important than those of other companies; because in case of a bank-company it is essential to
earn and maintain confidence of the depositors as its business is mainly run with the
depositors' money. The following directives are given for ensuring good governance
regarding constitution of board of directors, their duties & responsibilities and other related
activities:



1. Formation of Board of Directors:

The newly amended Section 15 of the Bank Company Act, 1991 (Amended upto 2013)
includes provisions for prior approval of Bangladesh Bank before the appointment of new
bank directors, as well as dismissal, termination or removal of any director from the post;
director’s fit & proper criteria; maximum number of directors; appointment of independent
directors; appointment of maximum 2(two) members from a family as director; etc.



1.1. Appointment of New directors:

Under section 15(4) of the Bank Company Act, 1991 (amended upto 2013), every
banking company, other than specialized banks, at the time of taking prior approval from
Bangladesh Bank for appointing/reappointing directors should furnish the following
documents along with the application:

a) Personal information of the nominated person (Appendix-ka);
b) Nominated person’s declaration(Appendix-kha);
c) ‘Declaration for confidentiality’ by the nominated person(Appendix-ga);

--- Page 2 ---
d) In case of Independent director, the approval letter from Security and Exchange
commission;
e) In case of Independent director, a declaration of the directors concern as Appendix-gha
(he will also submit declaration under Appendix-ka, kha & ga);
f) CIB report of the nominated person;
g) Updated list of the directors.


1.2. Vacation of office of Director:

a) The office of director shall be vacated according to the instructions specified in section
108(1) of the Companies Act, 1994. Besides, when a bank director becomes defaulter
and does not repay the loan within two months after getting a notice under the section 17
of the Bank Company Act, 1991; provides false statement at the time of appointment; or
fails to fulfil the minimum eligibility criteria, the office of the director will be vacated.

b) If the office of a director is vacated by a notice under the section 17 of BCA, the person
will not be eligible to become a director of the bank or any other bank or any financial
institution for one year from the date of repayment of the total amount due to the bank. It
is mentionable here that the dues can be adjusted with the shares held by the director in
that bank. When a director receives a notice under section 17 of BCA, 1991, he/she can’t
transfer his/her shares of that bank until he/she repays all the liabilities of the noticed
bank or financial institution.

c) Besides, Bangladesh Bank can remove a director or chairman of a bank, except state
owned banks, for conducting any kind of activities that is detrimental to the interest of
the banks depositors or against the public interest under Section 46 and can supersede
the board of a banking company under Section 47 of BCA, 1991.

1.3. Removal of Directors from office:

According to section 108(2) of the Companies Act, 1994, with the prior approval of
Bangladesh Bank, a bank director other than specialized banks can be removed from his
office for the reason specified in its Articles of Association. For this purpose, the reason
and grounds of the dismissal/removal and copy of the decision of the board and list of
directors should be submitted to Bangladesh Bank. In this case, the removal will be
effective from the date of Bangladesh Bank’s approval.

1.4. Appointment of Alternate Director:

Subject to compliance of section 101 of the Companies Act, 1994, an alternate director
can be appointed to act for a director during his absence for a continuous period of not
less than three months from Bangladesh. In this context, the following instructions should
be followed:

a) Bank has to collect and properly maintain the documentary evidences relating to
departure and arrival of the original director. If there is any exception, the chief
executive officer should immediately inform it to Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 3 ---
b) The copy of the decision of the board regarding appointment of alternate director, with
original director’s probable returning date from abroad should be sent to Bangladesh
Bank within 7 days of taking the decision and the director’s arrival date must be
intimated to Bangladesh Bank immediately after his return.

c) Any loan defaulter or any person who is not eligible to become a director as per any
rules & regulation will not be appointed as an alternate director.

d) As appointment of alternate director is a temporary measure; therefore, he/she will not
be included in any kind of committee constituted by the board.

e) While in the office, an alternate director or his/her affiliated organization will not get
any kind of loan facilities from his bank. In case of previous loan, enhancement of limit
or extension of time period or any kind of exemption or interest waiver will not be
allowed. Moreover, all restrictions applicable to directors according to rules &
regulations will also be applicable to the alternate director.


2. Depositor Director:

As the previous provisions regarding appointment of Depositor Directors of the Bank
Company Act, 1991 has been amended; appointment of director from depositors is no
longer required. But, after complying regulation under sec 15(9) of the Bank Company Act,
1991 (amended upto 2013) bank can consider the tenure of existing depositor director or
may appoint them as independent director.


3. Information regarding Directors:


Banks are advised to take the following steps regarding director information:

a) Every bank should keep an updated list of bank directors,

b) Banks should send a directors’ list to other banks or financial institutions immediately
after the appointment or release of director.

c) Banks should display a list of directors in the website and update it on a regular basis.


4. Responsibilities of the Board of Directors:

To ensure good governance in the bank management it is essential to have specific
demarcation of responsibilities and authorities among controlling bodies over bank affairs.
In the Bank Company Act, 1991 (amended upto 2013) the newly included Section 15(kha)
& (ga) give responsibility to the board of directors for establishing policies for the bank
company, for risk management, internal controls, internal audit and compliance and for
ensuring their implementation.

--- Page 4 ---
4.1. Responsibilities and Authorities of the Board of Directors:

a) Work-planning and strategic management:

The board shall determine the objectives and goals and to this end shall chalk out
strategies and work-plans on annual basis. It shall specially engage itself in the affairs
of making strategies consistent with the determined objectives and goals and in the
issues relating to structural change and reformation for enhancement of institutional
efficiency and other relevant policy matters. It shall analyze/monitor, at quarterly
rests, the development of implementation of the work-plans.

ii.
The board shall have its analytical review incorporated in the Annual Report as
regards to the success/failure in achieving the business and other targets as set out in
its annual work-plan and shall apprise the shareholders of its opinions/
recommendations on future plans and strategies. It shall set the Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) for the CEO & officers immediate two tiers below the CEO, and
have it evaluated from time to time.

b) Credit and risk management:

The policies, strategies, procedures etc. in respect of appraisal of loan/investment
proposal, sanction, disbursement, recovery, reschedule and write-off thereof shall be
made with the board's approval under the purview of the existing laws, rules and
regulations. The board shall specifically distribute the power of sanction of
loan/investment and such distribution should desirably be made among the CEO and
his subordinate executives as much as possible. No director, however, shall interfere,
direct or indirect, into the process of loan approval.

ii.
The board shall frame policies for risk management and get them complied with and
shall monitor the compliance at quarterly rests and review the concerned report of the
risk management team and shall compile in the minutes of the board meeting. The
board shall monitor the compliance of the guidelines of Bangladesh Bank regarding
key risk management.


c) Internal control management:



The board shall be vigilant on the internal control system of the bank in order to
attain and maintain satisfactory qualitative standard of its loan/investment portfolio. The
board will establish such an internal control system so that the internal audit process can be
conducted independently from the management. It shall review the reports submitted by its
audit committee at quarterly rests regarding compliance of recommendations made in
internal and external audit reports and the Bangladesh Bank inspection reports.

--- Page 5 ---
d) Human resources management and development:

Policies relating to recruitment, promotion, transfer, disciplinary and punitive
measures, human resources development etc. and service rules shall be framed and
approved by the board. The chairman or the directors shall in no way involve
themselves or interfere into or influence over any administrative affairs including
recruitment, promotion, transfer and disciplinary measures as executed under the set
service rules. No member of the board of directors shall be included in the selection
committees for recruitment and promotion to different levels. Recruitment, promotion,
transfer & punishment of the officers immediate two tiers below the CEO shall,
however, rest upon the board. Such recruitment and promotion shall have to be carried
out complying with the service rules i.e., policies for recruitment and promotion.

ii.
The board shall focus its special attention to the development of skills of bank's staff
in different fields of its business activities including prudent appraisal of
loan/investment proposals, and to the adoption of modern electronic and information
technologies and the introduction of effective Management Information System
(MIS). The board shall get these programmes incorporated in its annual work plan.

iii.
The board will compose Code of Ethics for every tier and they will follow it properly.
The board will promote healthy c`ode of conducts for developing a compliance
culture.


Financial management:


The annual budget and the statutory financial statements shall be finalized with the
approval of the board. It shall at quarterly rests review/monitor the positions in respect
of bank's income, expenditure, liquidity, non-performing asset, capital base and
adequacy, maintenance of loan loss provision and steps taken for recovery of
defaulted loans including legal measures.

ii.
The board shall frame the policies and procedures for bank's purchase and
procurement activities and shall accordingly approve the distribution of power for
making such expenditures. The maximum possible delegation of such power of
expenditures shall rest on the CEO and his subordinates. The decision on matters
relating to infrastructure development and purchase of land, building, vehicles etc. for
the purpose of bank's business shall, however, be adopted with the approval of the
board.


iii.
The board will review whether an Asset-Liability Committee (ALCO) has been
formed and it is working according to Bangladesh Bank guidelines.

--- Page 6 ---
f) Appointment of Chief Executive Officer (CEO):


In order to strengthen the financial base of the bank and obtain confidence of the depositors,
one of the major responsibilities of the board of directors is to appoint an honest, efficient,
experienced and suitable CEO or Managing Director. The Board of directors will appoint a suitable
CEO with the approval of the Bangladesh Bank.

g) Other responsibilities of the Board:


The board should follow and comply with the responsibilities assigned by Bangladesh Bank.


4.2. Meeting of Board:

Board of directors may meet once or more than once in a month if necessary. But Board of
directors shall meet at least once in every three months. Excessive meetings are discouraged.


4.3. Responsibilities of the Chairman of the Board of Directors:

a) As the chairman of the board of directors or chairman of any committee formed by the
board or any director does not personally possess the jurisdiction to apply policy making
or executive authority, he/she shall not participate in or interfere into the administrative
or operational and routine affairs of the bank.

b) The chairman may conduct on-site inspection of any bank-branch or financing activities
under the purview of the oversight responsibilities of the board. He may call for any
information relating to bank's operation or ask for investigation into any such affairs; he
may submit such information or investigation report to the meeting of the board or the
executive committee and if deemed necessary, with the approval of the board, he shall
effect necessary action thereon in accordance with the set rules through the CEO.
However, any complaint against the CEO shall have to be apprised to Bangladesh Bank
through the board along with the statement of the CEO.

c) The chairman may be offered an office-room, a personal secretary/assistant, one
peon/MLSS, one telephone at the office, one mobile phone to use inside the country and
a vehicle in the business-interest of the bank subject to the approval of the board.



5. Formation of committees from the Board of Directors:

Each bank company can form 1(one) executive committee, 1(one) audit committee and
1(one) risk management committee with the directors. Board can’t form any other permanent,
temporary or sub- committee except the above mentioned three committees.

--- Page 7 ---
5.1. Executive committee:

Executive committee should be formed with the members of the board to continue the urgent and
daily or routine works between the intervals of two board meetings. Executive committee will
perform according to their terms of reference determined by the board of directors.

a) Organizational structure:

Members of the committee will be nominated by the board of directors from
themselves;

ii.
The executive committee will comprise of maximum 07 (seven) members;

iii.
Members may be appointed for a 03 (three)-year term of office;

iv.
Chairman of the Board of Directors can be the chairman of executive committee;

Company secretary of the bank will be the secretary of the executive committee.

b) Qualifications of the Members:

Integrity, dedication, and opportunity to spare time in the functions of committee will
have to be considered while nominating a director to the committee;

ii.
Each member should be capable of making valuable and effective contributions in the
functioning of the committee;

iii.
To perform his or her role effectively each committee member should have adequate
understanding of the detailed responsibilities of the committee membership as well as
the bank's business, operations and its risks.


c) Roles and Responsibilities of the Executive Committee:

The executive committee can decide or can act in those cases as instructed by the
Board of directors that are not specifically assigned on full board through the Bank
Company Act, 1991 and other laws and regulations.

ii.
The executive committee can take all necessary decision or can approve cases within
power delegated by the board of directors.

iii.
All decisions taken in the executive committee should be ratified in the next board
meeting.

d) Meetings

The executive committee can sit any time as it may deem fit.

--- Page 8 ---
ii.
The committee may invite Chief Executive Officer, Head of internal audit or any other
Officer to its meetings, if it deems necessary;

iii.
To ensure active participation and contribution by the members, a detailed
memorandum should be distributed to committee members well in advance before
each meeting;

iv.
All decisions/observations of the committee should be noted in minutes.


5.2. Audit Committee:

The board will approve the objectives, strategies and overall business plans of the bank and
the audit committee will assist the board in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities. The committee
will review the financial reporting process, the system of internal control and management of
financial risks, the audit process, and the bank's process for monitoring compliance with laws and
regulations and its own code of business conduct.

a) Organizational structure:

Members of the committee will be nominated by the board of directors from the
directors;

ii. The audit committee will comprise of maximum 05 (five) members, with minimum 2
(two) independent director;

iii.
Audit committee will comprise with directors who are not executive committee
members;

iv.
Members may be appointed for a 03 (three) year term of office;

Company secretary of the bank will be the secretary of the audit committee.


b) Qualifications of the Member:

Integrity, dedication, and opportunity to spare time in the functions of committee will
have to be considered while nominating a director to the committee ;

ii.
Each member should be capable of making valuable and effective contributions in the
functioning of the committee;

iii.
To perform his or her role effectively each committee member should have adequate
understanding of the detailed responsibilities of the committee membership as well as
the bank's business, operations and its risks.

iv.
Professionally Experienced persons in banking/financial institutions specially having
educational qualification in Finance, Banking, Management, Economics, Accounting
will get preference in forming the committee.

--- Page 9 ---
c) Roles and Responsibilities of the Audit Committee

(i) Internal Control:

1. Evaluate whether management is setting the appropriate compliance culture by
communicating the importance of internal control and the management of risk and
ensuring that all employees have clear understanding of their roles and
responsibilities;

2. Review management’s actions in building computerization of the bank and its
applications and bank's Management Information System (MIS);

3. Consider whether internal control strategies recommended by internal and external
auditors have been implemented by the management;

4. Consider reports relating to fraud, forgery, deficiencies in internal control or other
similar issues detected by internal and external auditors and inspectors of the
regulatory authority and place it before the board after reviewing whether necessary
corrective measures have been taken by the management.

(ii) Financial Reporting:

1. Audit committee will check whether the financial statements reflect the complete
and concrete information and determine whether the statements are prepared
according to existing rules & regulations and standards enforced in the country and
as per relevant prescribed accounting standards set by Bangladesh Bank;

2. Discuss with management and the external auditors to review the financial
statements before its finalization.

(iii) Internal Audit:

1. Audit committee will monitor whether internal audit working independently from
the management.

2. Review the activities of the internal audit and the organizational structure and ensure
that no unjustified restriction or limitation hinders the internal audit process;

3. Examine the efficiency and effectiveness of internal audit function;

4. Examine whether the findings and recommendations made by the internal auditors
are duly considered by the management or not.

(iv) External Audit

1. Review the performance of the external auditors and their audit reports;

2. Examine whether the findings and recommendations made by the external auditors
are duly considered by the management or not.

--- Page 10 ---
3. Make recommendations to the board regarding the appointment of the external
auditors.



(v) Compliance with existing laws and Regulations:

Review whether the laws and regulations framed by the regulatory authorities (central bank
and other bodies) and internal regulations approved by the board are being complied with.

(vi) Other Responsibilities:

1. Submit compliance report to the board on quarterly basis on regularization of the
omission, fraud and forgeries and other irregularities detected by the internal and
external auditors and inspectors of regulatory authorities;

2. External and internal auditors will submit their related assessment report, if the
committee solicit;

3. Perform other oversight functions as desired by the Board of Directors and evaluate
the committee's own performance on a regular basis.

d) Meetings:

1. The audit committee should hold at least 4 meetings in a year and it can sit any time
as it may deems fit;

2. The committee may invite Chief Executive Officer, Head of internal audit or any
other Officer to its meetings, if it deems necessary;

3. To ensure active participation and contribution by the members, a detailed
memorandum should be distributed to committee members well in advance before
each meeting;

4. All decisions/observations of the committee should be noted in minutes.



5.3. Risk Management Committee:

To play an effective role in mitigating impending risks arising out from strategies and
policies formulated by the Board and to carry out the responsibilities efficiently, a risk management
committee will be formed. After identifying and assessing several risk factors like credit risks,
foreign exchange risks, internal control and compliance risks, money laundering risks, information
and communication risks, management risks, interest risks, liquidity risks etc.; the risk management
committee will scrutinize whether appropriate risk management measures are being put in place and
applied and whether adequate capital and provision is being maintained against the risks identified.

--- Page 11 ---
a) Organizational Structure:

1. Members of the committee will be nominated by the board of directors from
themselves;


2. The Risk Management Committee will comprise of maximum 05 (five) members;

3. Members may be appointed for a 03 (three) year term of office;

4. Company secretary of the bank will be the secretary of the Risk Management
Committee.

b) Qualifications of the Member:

1. Integrity, dedication, and opportunity to spare time in the functions of committee
will have to be considered while nominating a director to the committee;

2. Each member should be capable of making valuable and effective contributions in
the functioning of the committee;

3. To perform his or her role effectively each committee member should have adequate
understanding of the detailed responsibilities of the committee membership as well
as the bank's business, operations and its risks.


c) Roles and Responsibilities of the Risk Management Committee:


i) Risk identification & control policy :

Formulation and implementation of appropriate strategies for risk assessment and its control
is the responsibility of Risk Management Committee. Risk Management Committee will
monitor risk management policies & methods and amend it if necessary. The committee will
review the risk management process to ensure effective prevention and control measures.

ii) Construction of organizational structure:

The responsibility of Risk Management Committee is to ensure an adequate organizational
structure for managing risk within the bank. The Risk Management Committee will supervise
formation of separate management level committees and monitor their activities for the
compliance of instructions of lending risk, foreign exchange transaction risk, internal control &
compliance risk, money laundering risk, information & communication risk including other risk
related guidelines.

iii) Analysis and approval of Risk Management policy:

Risk management policies & guidelines of the bank should be reviewed annually by the
committee. The committee will propose amendments if necessary and send it to the Board of

--- Page 12 ---
Directors for their approval. Besides, other limits including lending limit should be reviewed at
least once annually and should be amended, if necessary.

iv) Storage of data & Reporting system:

Adequate record keeping & reporting system developed by the bank management will be
approved by the risk management committee. The committee will ensure proper use of the
system. The committee will minute its proposal, suggestions & summary in a specific format &
inform the Board of Directors.

v) Monitoring the implementation of overall Risk Management Policy:

Risk Management Committee will monitor proper implementation of overall risk
management policies. They will monitor whether proper steps have been taken to mitigate all
risks including lending risk, market risk, and management risk.


vi) Other responsibilities:

1. Committee’s decision and suggestions should be submitted to the Board of Directors
quarterly in short form;

2. Comply instructions issued time to time by the controlling body;

3. Internal & external auditor will submit respective evaluation report whenever
required by the committee.


d) Meetings:

1. The risk management committee should hold at least 4 meetings in a year and it can
sit any time as it may deems fit;

2. The committee may invite Chief Executive Officer, Chief Risk Officer and any
other Officer to its meetings, if it deems necessary;

3. To ensure active participation and contribution by the members, a detailed
memorandum should be distributed to committee members well in advance before
each meeting;

4. All decisions/observations of the committee should be noted in minutes.



6. Training for the Directors:

The directors shall make themselves fully aware of the banking laws and other related rules
and regulations for performing his duties properly.

--- Page 13 ---
7. This Circular has been issued for compliance of section 15, 15kha and 15ga of Banking
Companies Act, 1991(amended upto 2013). The Chief Executive Officer will inform about this
circular to the directors and other related persons.


This Circular is issued with immediate effect. After this circular becomes effective, BRPD
Circular Letter no.12, Dated :23 December 2002, BRPD Circular Letter no.12, Dated :10 June
2003, BRPD Circular no.11, Dated :5 November 2007, BRPD Circular Letter no.10, Dated :23
July 2008 & attached Notification No: BRPD(R-1)717/2008-462, dated :22 July 2008, BRPD
Circular no.12, Dated :18 August 2008, BRPD Circular no.5, Dated :28 January 2010, BRPD
Circular no.6, Dated :4 February 2010, BRPD Circular Letter no.2, Dated : 15 February 2010,
BRPD Circular no.14, Dated :22 April 2010 & BRPD Circular Letter no.8, Dated :19 June 2011
will be treated as void.




Yours faithfully,


(Saiful Islam)
Deputy General Manager
Phone :9530155

--- Page 14 ---
Annexure-A
Information regarding Proposed Director
1. Name


2. Father' s Name

3. Mother' s Name

4. Nationality

5.(a) Date of Birth



(b) Date of Place


6.Address :
(a) Permanent Address (With Telephone No.): (b) Present Address (With Telephone No.):

7. National ID No.




8. Tax Identification No.

9. Marital Status



(a) If married, Spouse’s Name :

(b) Spouse’s Occupation:


(c) Spouse’s Nationality :

10. Near Relatives (Father-Mother, Brother-Sister, Children and dependents):

Name
Relation
Date of Birth
Name and Address of Other
Banks/Financial Institutions, If hold the
office of a Director.





11. Educational Qualification: (a) Institutional Education:
(b) Professional/Technical
Education:




(c) Training/Seminar
12. Present Occupation:



(a) Name and Address of Institution:
(b) Nature of Business:




(c) Job Title:



(d) Telephone No.:

13. Experience (Minimum 10 years)

Name and Address of
Organizations
Date of Engagement
Position Held
Responsibilities







14. Name of institutions where appointed as Director or holds shares 10% or more:

Name and
Address of
institutions
Status
(Director/Shareholder)
Nature of
Organization
(Public/Private)
Nature of
Business

Percentages of
Shareholding (%)

--- Page 15 ---
15. Date of First Appointment as Director:

16. Date of Last Re-Appointment

17. Interval (As per section 15Ka Ka (2) of the Bank Company Act. 1991):

18. Whether availing any loan from any Bank or Financial Institution or any other sources? (Y/N) If
yes specify their name and amount of outstanding :


Signature:
Name :
Dated :

--- Page 16 ---
Annexure-B
Letter of Declaration

1) I do hereby declare that I am eligible to become a director of a bank company as per Fit and
Proper Test criteria of Section 15(6) and other sections of the Bank Company Act, 1991
(amended upto 2013) as well as BRPD Circular No. 11 dated 27 October 2013. I further
declare that-

(i) I have management or business or professional experience for at least 10 (ten) years;

(ii) I have not been and was not convicted by any court in any criminal offence or involved
in any fraud/forgery, financial crime or other illegal activities.

(iii) There is no adverse observations/comments against me in verdict of the court of any
Civil/Criminal case.

(iv) I have not been convicted in regard to contravention of rules, regulations or discipline of
the regulatory authorities of financial sector.

(v) I have not been involved with any Company/firm whose registration/license has been
cancelled.

(vi)There are no loans taken by me or my allied concern from any bank or financial
institution that have become defaulted.

(vii) I have not been adjudicated a bankrupt by a court.

(vii) I am not a director of any bank company or financial institution.

(ix) I have never been removed from any company, specially from any bank or financial
institution as Chief Executive, Chairman or Director.

(x) I am not a defaulter of tax for myself or for sole proprietorship or partnership.


2) I also declare, according to the section 93 of the Companies Act, 1994, that if I am appointed
as director of ----------- Bank Limited, I agree to discharge my duties.


Signature
Date

Name

Witness:
Signature
Date

Name
Signature
Date

Name

--- Page 17 ---
Annexure-Ga

DECLARATION OF SECRECY

I, undersigned, hereby declare that if I am appointed as director of …………….Bank Ltd, any
case or documents presented for my consideration or any kind of information come to my
knowledge in the course of my duties I will not disclose it directly or indirectly to any person.
Unless for performing my duties or instructed by the rules & regulation of the country or
authorised by the bank’s board to do so.


Signature
Date

Name


Witness:
Signature
Date

Name
Signature
Date

Name

--- Page 18 ---
Annexure-Gha

Declaration of Proposed Independent Director

I, undersigned, hereby declare that I am not connected with the management of ………………..Bank
Ltd, and don’t hold any share of that bank. Moreover, I declare that I am not connected or will not be
connected with the bank or with any bank related person in real interest or visible interest at present,
past or in future.

Signature
Date

Name


Witness:
Signature
Date

Name
Signature
Date

Name