--- Page 1 ---
RFTICT UIRT
raT, 1-o00
website: www.bb.org.bd
9FTTD4TE ATFT R-od/2oRR
TA:---
NRM,
P"GUIDELINES OF FC CLEARING THROUGH BD-RTGS SYSTEMS"
7T3 3,
(TATE WTT T)
T-7(9NTANTG)
T: O-tooc8e

--- Page 2 ---
GUIDELNES OF Fc CLEARING THROUGH BD-RTGS SYSTEM
GUIDELINES OF FC CLEARING THROUGH BD-RTGS SYSTEM
Bangladesh Bank has been providing clearing and settlement services for local currency as well as
approved foreign currencies within the country since long time. Forex Reserve and Treasury Management
Department of Bangladesh Bank executes clearing and settlement through maintaining FC accounts in
approved currencies of scheduled banks. However, the whole FC Clearing and settlement process is still
manual and paper instrument based which require physical movement of instruments and officials
resulting in higher transaction cost and inconvenience. To overcome this problem, Bangladesh Bank has
decided to introduce FC clearing and settlement through the RTGS system.
To facilitate safe, secure and efficient interbank payment system, Bangladesh Bank launched Real
Time Gross Settlement (BD-RTGS) system on 29h October 2015 as part of its inclusive digitization
initiative. BD-RTGS opened a new horizon in the payment ecosystem, accommodating instant settlement
of large value and time critical payments in the country. RTGS system is capable of operating both in
local currency and foreign currency. Now Bangladesh Bank is introducing clearing and settlement in
S(Five) foreign currency [US Dollar (USD), Great Britain Pound(GBP), Euro (EUR), Canadian Dollar
(CAD), Japanese Yen (JPY)] transactions inside the country. Mentionable that, the Clearing & Settlement
of Chinese Yuan (CNY) will be incorporated in the RTGS system soon. RTGS is a credit transfer system
and operation of the FC in RTGS system is similar to that of local currency (BDT) settlement system. At
the beginning of each business day, Banks' specific FC account will be debited and the related RTGS
settlement account will be credited as per Standing Instruction of the participants. Then, as per instruction
of participants, transactions will be settled instantly and fund will be transferred to the beneficiary's
account. The transaction will be settled only when the RTGS settlement Account of a specif+c currency
has sufficient balance. At the end of the business day, balance of settlement account of RTGS system will
be transferred to Banks' specific FC account. Thus FC clearing through RTGS system will eliminate
settlement risk as well as credit risk for the participants.
The features and prerequisites for inland FC clearing through the RTGS system are as follows:
BD-RTGS is a stand-alone system; no other payment platform is connected to this system.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 3 ---
GUIDELINES OF FC CLEARING THROUGH BD-RTGS SYSTEM
Banks have to maintain FC Accounts with Bangladesh Bank to originate and receive FC
transactions in RTGS system.
RTGS system allows only currency-wise transaction; cross-currency transaction is not allowed.
4. Any amount of FC transaction can be settled through RTGS system.
AD branches and Head ofice clearing unit of banks can originate and receive FC transactions in
RTGS system.
SOD (Start of Day) Fund transfer, Top-Up and EOD (End of Day) reconciliation will be
executed by Forex Reserve & Treasury Management Department of Bangladesh Bank.
To execute customer transaction, Originating Bank has to mention the originator account type as
well as beneficiary account type (such as ERQ, SFCAMS, RFCD, NFCD, PFCD, NRB FCY,
Airlines, Shipping FCY, Intra-EPZ, Inter-EPZ etc) in the account information field of the
instruction.
Originating Bank has to mention the purpose of the transaction properly; this field will be treated
as mandatory in case of FC settlement. Bank can also provide additional information in other
fields of the message.
9. Bank can charge maximum BDT100 (Including VAT) or equivalent FC for each transaction
from the originator.
10. Intraday Liquidity Facility (ILF) will not be available for FC transactions in RTGS system.
11. Each Bank will prepare their BCP, operation procedure & guidelines and maintain separate
reconciliation team for FC settlement.
12. Banks shall follow the Guidelines of Foreign Exchange Transactions (GFET) while originating
and posting a transaction as and when applicable.
13. For FC transaction through RTGS system, section 4.2 of BD-RTGS System Rules will be
relaxed but transaction shall be posted to the beneficiary account ithin 2 (Two) hours of the
settlement instruction from BD-RTGS, otherwise to be returned.
14. All other rules and procedures of local currency settlement as well as BD-RTGS system Rules
will be applicable to FC settlement through the RTGS system.
Page 2 of 2