--- Page 1 ---
Anti-Money Laundering Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.

AML Circular No. 20/2008
Date : 14/08/2008

Chief Executive
All Money Changers

Instructions to be followed by the Money Changers for compliance of the
provisions contained in the Money Laundering Prevention ordinance
2008 and anti terrorism ordinance 2008.

Dear Sir,
Attention is drawn to the AML Circular No. 16/2008 and 17/2008 dated
29/04/2008 and 29/06/2008 respectively. Along with other organizations the money
changers in Bangladesh have also been designated as reporting organizations as per the
above mentioned /said ordinances. The following instructions are issued as per power
conferred in section 23 of money Laundering Prevention Ordinance 2008 and section 15
of Anti Terrorism Ordinance, for proper compliance of the provisions of the said
ordinances by the Money Changers.
Ka) as per section 25(i) of Money Laundering Prevention Ordinance, 2008 each money
changer shall preserve correct and complete introductory of every customer and
they shall preserve the same for a period of at least five years.
kha) all officials of the money changers are to remain conscious and alert to identify
unusual/suspicious transactions. Cases of unusual/suspicious transactions which
may have connections to money laundering will have to be reported immediately
on their detection as per section 25(i)(d) of Money Laundering Prevention
Ordinance, 2008 in writing as per proforma at Appendix-ka attached herewith to
the Anti-Money Laundering Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka.

Ga) no official of the money changer shall disclose anything at any stage regarding the
reported unusual/suspicious transactions to the clients or any other persons so that
the investigation is not hampered or influenced adversely.
Gha) in order to ensure proper compliance of the money Laundering Prevention
Ordinance 2008, Anti Terrorism Ordinance, 2008 and AML circulars issued by
Bangladesh Bank each Money changer shall arrange appropriate training for its
officials.
Umo) besides these, all money changers will comply with the instructions of the circulars
issued by Foreign Exchange policy department, all instructions in the Foreign
Exchange Control Act, 1947 and Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions.

Yours Sincerely,
(Signed)
(Md. Eskandar Miah)
General Manager(current charge)
Phone - 7124366

--- Page 2 ---
(Annex‐Ka)
Suspicious Transaction Report (STR)
(Money Changer Company)

A. Reporting Institution :

1. Name of the Money Changer:





2. Address:





3. Date of report :



B. Customer details :
1. Name of the customer:



2. Address (Present & Permanent):











3. Profession of the Customer:





4. Nationality:





5. Father’s name:





6. Mother’s Name:





7. Date of birth:





8.National ID no.:





C. Suspicious Activity Information
Summary characterization of suspicious activity:

Identity Theft
Counterfeit check

Misuse of Position or Self Dealing









Check Fraud
Counterfeit instrument

Mysterious Disappearance









Check Kitting
Mortgage Loan Fraud

Structuring










False statement

Defalcation/Embezzlement

Terrorist Financing









Value of transaction

Nature of transaction

Activity in account









Computer intrusion
Predicate Offence Under MLPO, 08 (Pls. Specify)










Other





D. Reasons for considering the transaction(s) as unusual/suspicious?
(Mention summery of suspicion and consequence of events)











E. Documents to be enclosed
1. Copy of passport (Containing the photo,
address, visa, endorsement)
2. Purchase and encashment certificate


Signature :
(Authorized officer)
Name :
Designation :
Date :
Phone :