--- Page 1 ---
Anti-Money Laundering Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
AML Circular No. 18
Date: 10/08/2008

Chief Executive
All Insurance Companies in Bangladesh

Instructions to be followed by the Insurance companies for
compliance of the provisions contained in the
Money Laundering Prevention Ordinance,2008

Dear Sir,

Attention is drawn to the AML Circular No. 16/2008 issued on 29 April, 2008. As per
section 2(tha) of Money Laundering Prevention Ordinance 2008, besides other
organizations all insurance companies working in Bangladesh are selected as the
reporting organisations. While performing the day to day work of the reporting
organisation, if any transaction or related other activities of a client/policy holder seems
unusual/suspicious of having connections to money laundering will have to be reported
immediately to Bangladesh Bank. The following instructions are issued as per power
conferred in section 23 of Money Laundering Prevention ordinance, 2008 for proper
compliance of the provisions of the said ordinance by the Insurance Companies.
01.
To ensure proper compliance of section 25 of Money Laundering Prevention Ordinance,
2008 each insurance company will establish system of internal monitoring through
formation of a Central Compliance Unit at the Head Office under the leadership of a high
official and through nomination of a compliance officer at the branch/unit level of each
insurance company. CCU will be under direct supervision of the Chief Executive Officer.
In order to accomplish properly the jurisdiction and function of the Central Compliance
Unit, each insurance company will determine institutional strategy and program. Central
Compliance Unit will issue the instructions to be followed by the branches/agencies.
These instructions will be prepared combining the issues of monitoring of transactions,
monitoring, internal control, policies and procedures from the point of preventing money
laundering

02.
The following responsibilities will be carried out by the insurance companies as per
section 25 of Money Laundering Prevention Ordinance, 2008
(ka)
before issuing a policy in favour of any customer, the insurance company will collect
correct and complete introductory information about the customer with related documents
and verify the information/documents for it’s authenticity and preserve the documents.
(kha) shall preserve record of transaction with all necessary documents for a period of at least
five years from the date of closing any account or cancellation of any Policy/closing on
maturity/rejection of any policy

--- Page 2 ---
(ga)
provide the records kept under clause (a) and (b) to Bangladesh Bank time to time upon
request.
03.
If there is any reasonable ground to believe that a transaction or attempt of a transaction
may have connections to money laundering as per Money Laundering Prevention
Ordinance, 2008 will have to be reported immediately to the Central Compliance Unit of
the concern company using form “Ka”. Central Compliance Unit will examine and
review the received report with comments and if considered as a reportable case will be
forwarded
to
Anti-Money
Laundering
Department,
Bangladesh
Bank
with
confidentiality. The report received from the branch/agency must not be delayed more
than 5(five) working days in the case of sending to Bangladesh Bank.
04.
Insurance Companies will take necessary actions with appropriate vigilant and
responsibility to detect and combat money laundering through Insurance companies
05.
In order to ensure proper compliance of the Money Laundering Prevention Ordinance,
2008 each insurance company will arrange appropriate training for the officials.
06.
The Insurance Companies are requested to ensure proper compliance of the Money
Laundering Prevention Ordinance, 2008 and to inform the subject to all concern.
07.
The Insurance companies will inform Anti Money Laundering Department of Bangladesh
Bank about the actions taken by them in this regard within one month.

Please acknowledge receipt.


Yours Sincerely,
(Signed)
(Md. Eskandar Miah)
General Manager (current charge)
Phone - 7124366