--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bb.org.bd

Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka










13 April 2021
BRPD Circular No-07




Date -----------------------










30 Choitra 1427

Managing Directors/ Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,
Guidelines on Country Risk Management (GCRM) for Banks
With the enhanced international exposure of Bangladesh resulting from gradual economic
development, the banking sector is increasingly getting involved in cross border placements,
lending and investments that making the banks exposed to country and transfer risk.
As a result, it is imperative that banks have sound risk management policies and practices
in place to proactively manage the risks. In this regard, Guidelines on Country Risk
Management (GCRM) for Banks has been prepared for addressing the risk of both on and off
balance sheet exposures to loss of banks cuased by adverse events in a foreign country.
To comply with the international best practices and to build the banking industry more
resilient to shocks, all the scheduled banks are hereby directed to take necessary measures and
maintain appropriate provisions against the country risk as per the instructions set out in this
guidelines.
These guidelines will come into force from January 2022.

Yours Sincerely






(Md. Nazrul Islam)
General Manager
Phone-9530252
E-mail: nazrul.islam122@bb.org.bd

--- Page 2 ---
Bangladesh Bank

GUIDELINES ON COUNTRY RISK
MANAGEMENT (GCRM) FOR BANKS

--- Page 3 ---
Guidelines on Country
Risk Management (GCRM) for Banks


Advisor
Abu Farah Md. Nasser, Deputy Governor

Coordinators
Md. Shahidul Islam, Executive Director
Md. Nazrul Islam, General Manager, BRPD

Team Members
Mohammad Shahriar Siddiqui, Deputy General Manger, BRPD
Md Shah Naoaj, CFA, Deputy Director, BRPD
Mir Md Moyazzem Hosen, Deputy Director, BRPD

--- Page 4 ---
Foreword
The economy of Bangladesh experienced a persistent GDP growth of 7 percent in the last
decade, resulting from a fast-growing manufacturing sector—which includes the second-
largest ready-made garment industry in the world—and solid remittance inflows. In line with
the economic development of the country, the banking sector also developed significant cross
border relationships. Indeed, as country risk may arise due to the risk of exposure to any loss
caused by events in a foreign country, and transfer risks may arise because of exchange
restrictions imposed by the foreign country, it is imperative to have sound risk management
policies and practices in place to safeguard the banks from these risks. In this regard,
Bangladesh Bank has prepared this ―Guidelines on Country Risk Management (GCRM)‖ for
Banks in line with international best practice under principle 21 of Basel Core Principles
(BCPs) for Effective Banking Supervision 2012.
The GCRM sets out the minimum requirements and supervisory perspective of Bangladesh
Bank to ensure that banks have adequate policies and processes in place to identify, measure,
evaluate, monitor, report and control or mitigate country risk in their placements, lending and
investments. The GCRM will make the overall country risk management of banks more
appropriate and efficient.
We believe the GCRM shall be a valuable addition to the banks‘ risk management policies,
practices and process. This is an evolving matter, which will regularly be reviewed by
Bangladesh Bank to capture the changing dynamics of the economy and business
environment as well as cross-border relationship.
Abu Farah Md. Nasser


Deputy Governor
Bangladesh Bank

--- Page 5 ---
Introduction:
This Guidelines on Country Risk Management (GCRM) for Banks sets out the minimum
requirements and supervisory perspective of the Bangladesh Bank (BB) with regard to
ensuring that banks have adequate structures, policies and processes in place to identify,
measure, evaluate, monitor, report and control or mitigate country risk in their cross-border
placements, lending and investments and for maintaining appropriate capital and/or
reserves against such risks on a timely basis. This GCRM is issued under section 45 of the
Banking Company Act, 1991 following the Principle 21 regarding ‗country and transfer
risk‘ of Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision 2012 of the Bank for
International Settlements (BIS).
Country risk refers to the possibility that a foreign obligor may be incapable or unwilling to
fulfill his obligations due to country-specific economic, political, social or ecological
conditions. These may include the consequences of exchange control, currency
devaluation, official government actions or significant socio-political changes in the
country where placements, lending and investments made, largely unpredictable events
such as natural disasters or external shocks arising from global phenomena such as
international treaties and agreements, financial or oil price shock. Indeed, country risk does
not include individual counter-party risk but discharge from country-specific issues and is
measured and monitored according to where the risk is domiciled rather than where the
obligor is domiciled.
2. Definitions
Country Risk: Country Risk is the risk of both on and off balance sheet exposures to
loss caused by events in a foreign country1. The concept is broader than Sovereign
Risk, which is a sub-set of Country Risk, as all forms of lending or investment activity
whether to/with individuals, corporates, banks or governments are covered. It includes
contagion risk, currency risk, indirect country risk, macro-economic risk and transfer
risk.
3. Categories of Country Risk
The main categories of Country Risk comprise Sovereign, Contagion Risk, Contagion
Risk, Currency Risk, Indirect Country Risk, Macroeconomic Risk, and Transfer Risk.

1 Reference document: BIS document on Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, 2012.

--- Page 6 ---
a) Sovereign Risk is the risk that a foreign government may not have the capacity or
willingness to repay its direct and indirect (i.e., guaranteed) foreign currency
obligations;
b) Contagion Risk is the risk that developments in one country lead to a downgrade or
adverse credit conditions not only for that country but also other countries in its
region.
c) Currency Risk is the risk that a borrower‘s holdings of domestic cash and income
streams become inadequate to service its foreign currency obligations due to a
devaluation of the domestic currency;
d) Indirect Country Risk is the risk that the repayment ability of a domestic borrower
is adversely affected by any event occurs in a foreign country where the borrower has
business interests; and
e) Macroeconomic Risk is the risk that a borrower in a foreign country may suffer from
economic policies of the government in that foreign country, e.g. higher interest rates
or taxes, which adversely affects its repayment ability.
f) Transfer Risk: Transfer Risk is the risk that a borrower may not be able to convert
local currency into foreign exchange and so may be unable to make debt service
payments in foreign currency. The risk normally arises due to exchange restrictions
imposed by the government in the borrower‘s country. 2
4. General Requirements:
Banks should formulate appropriate, well documented and clearly defined 'Country
Risk Management' (GCRM) policies, with the approval of the respective Boards. The
GCRM policy should address the issues of identifying, measuring, monitoring and
controlling country exposure risks. The Policy should specify the responsibility and
accountability of the various levels for the country risk management decisions. Banks
should also put in place procedures for ensuring that necessary steps are taken in
accordance with the GCRM policy. The GCRM policy should be periodically
reviewed by the Board on the basis of the experience gained.

2 Reference document: IMF paper on External Debt Statistics – Guide for compilers and users, 2003.

--- Page 7 ---
Banks should institute appropriate procedures for dealing with country risk problems.
They should have in place contingency plans and clear exit strategies, which would be
activated at times of crisis. Appropriate systems/ procedures should be laid down with
the approval of the Board to handle situations involving significant changes in
conditions in any country. For the present, only in respect of the country, where a
bank‘s net funded exposure is 2 percent or more of its total assets, the bank is required
to formulate the GCRM policy for dealing with that country risk problems.
5. Specific Requirements:
Banks should reckon both funded and non-funded exposures from their domestic as
well as foreign branches while identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling
country risks. In the case of foreign banks operating in Bangladesh, the scope would
be confined to their branches in Bangladesh.
Banks should take into account indirect country risk. For example, exposures to a
domestic commercial borrower with a large economic dependence on a certain
country may be considered as subject to indirect country risk. Indirect exposures may
be reckoned at 50 % of the exposure for the purpose of these guidelines. For the
present, only in respect of the country, where a bank‘s net funded exposure is 2
percent or more of its total assets, the bank is required to reckon indirect country risk
for measuring, monitoring and controlling with that country risk.
Exposures should be computed on a net basis i.e., gross exposure ‗minus‘ collaterals,
guarantees, insurance etc. Netting may be permitted for cash collaterals, bank
guarantees and credit insurance available in/ issued by countries in a lower risk
category than the country on which exposure is assumed.
Banks may put in place appropriate systems to move over to internal assessment of
country risk. Banks should evolve sound systems for measuring and monitoring
country risk. The system should be able to identify the full dimensions of country
risk as well as incorporating features that acknowledge the links between credit and
market risk. Banks should use a variety of internal and external sources as a means to
measure country risk. Banks should not rely solely on rating agencies or other
external sources as their only country risk-monitoring tool. Banks should also
incorporate information from the relevant country managers of their foreign branches

--- Page 8 ---
into their country risk assessments. However, the rating accorded by a bank to any
country should not be better than the rating of that country by an international rating
agency. For the present, only in respect of the country, where a bank‘s net funded
exposure is 2percent or more of its total assets, the bank is required to undertake
internal assessment of country risk rating.
The frequency of periodic reviews of country risk ratings should be at least once a
year with a provision to review the rating of specific country, based on any major
events in that country, where bank exposure is high, even before the next periodical
review of the ratings is due.
6. Exposure limits
Bank Boards may set country exposure limits in relation to the bank‘s regulatory
capital (Tier 1) with sub-limits, if considered necessary for products, branches,
maturity etc. The basis for setting the limits for the country/ category shall be left to
the discretion of the banks‘ Boards. The country exposure limits set by the Board
should be reviewed periodically and in any case should be at least once a year.
Exposure limit for any country should not exceed its regulatory capital, except in the
case of insignificant risk category. In respect of foreign banks, the regulatory capital
would be the capital (Tier I) held in their Bangladesh‘s books.
Banks may also set up regional exposure limits for country groups, at the discretion of
their Boards. The Board may decide on the basis for grouping of countries and also
lay down the guidelines regarding all aspects of such regional exposure limits.
BB may, if it becomes necessary, prescribe a prudential aggregate country exposure
limit for the higher risk categories.
7. Monitoring of exposures
Banks should have a system in place to monitor current conditions in each of the
countries where it is significantly exposed. The level of resources devoted to
monitoring conditions within a country should be proportionate to the level of
exposure and the perceived level of risk. If any bank maintains an in-country office,
reports from the local staff are an obviously valuable resource for monitoring country
conditions.

--- Page 9 ---
Boards should review the country risk exposures at an annual basis. The review
should include progress in establishing internal country rating systems, compliance
with the regulatory and the internal limits, results of stress tests and the exit options
available to the banks in respect of countries belonging to ‗high risk & above‘
categories. In case, any significant deterioration takes place in respect of any
particular country risk or overall exposure, banks should report to the Board such
developments in its next meeting, without waiting for the quarterly review by the
Board.
Country risk management processes employed by banks would require adequate
internal controls that include audits or other appropriate oversight mechanisms to
ensure the integrity of the information used by senior officials in overseeing
compliance with policies and limits.
8. Risk Rating
Country risk ratings summarize the conclusions of the country risk analysis process.
The ratings are an important component of country risk management because they
provide a framework for establishing country exposure limits that reflect the banks‘s
tolerance for risk.
Banks may put in place appropriate systems to move over to internal assessment of
country risk. Banks should evolve sound systems for measuring and monitoring
country risk. The system should be able to identify the full dimensions of country risk
as well as incorporating features that acknowledge the links between credit and
market risk.
Banks should use a variety of internal and external sources as a means to measure
country risk. Banks should not rely solely on rating agencies or other external sources
as their only country risk-monitoring tool. Banks should also incorporate information
from the relevant country managers of their foreign branches into their country risk
assessments. As a minimum, Bank should analyze the Macroeconomic, Social,
Political and Legal Factors while analyzing country risk (see annex 1). However, the
rating assigned by a bank to any country should not be better than the rating of that
country by an international rating agency.
Bank should classify the country under following five categories:

--- Page 10 ---
Insignificant
ii.
Low
iii.
Marginal
iv.
Moderate
High

The mapping of the risk categories with the sovereign rating3 of S&P, Fitch and
Moody are given below:
Risk Categories
Equivalent Rating of S&P and Fitch
Equivalent Rating of Moody
Insignificant
AAA to AA
Aaa to Aa
Low
Marginal
BBB
Baa
Moderate
BB to B
Ba to B
High
Below B
Below B

For the present, only in respect of the country, where a bank‘s net funded exposure is
2 percent or more of its total assets, the bank is required to undertake internal
assessment of country risk rating.
9. Provisioning / Capital requirement
Banks shall make general provisions, with effect from the first quarter of 2022, on the
net funded country exposures on a graded scale ranging from 0. 25 to 20 percent. To
begin with, banks shall make provisions as per the following schedule:
Risk category
Provisioning requirement
Insignificant
Low
0.25%
Marginal
Moderate
High
20%
For the present, only in respect of the country, where a bank‘s net funded exposure is
2 percent or more of its total assets, the bank is required to make provision for dealing

3 For the countries for which sovereign rating is conducted by credit rating companies other than S&P, Fitch
and Moody, Bank should develop its own policy to map with the risk categories mentioned in point
8(e).

--- Page 11 ---
10

with that country risk exposure. However, exposure of foreign banks at their home
country may be excluded in this regard.
The provision for country risk shall be in addition to the provisions required to be
held according to the asset classification status of the asset. In the case of ‗bad loans‘,
provision held, including provision held for country risk, may not exceed 100% of the
outstanding.
10. Stress Testing
Banks should periodically stress-test their foreign exposures and report the results to
the board of directors and senior management. As used here, stress testing does not
necessarily refer to the use of sophisticated financial modeling tools, but rather to the
need for all institutions to evaluate in some way the potential impact of different
scenarios on their country risk profiles.
11. Disclosures, Reporting and Monitoring
Banks shall disclose as a part of the 'Notes on Accounts' to the Balance Sheet as on
31st March each year,
the risk category-wise country exposures, and
ii.
the extent of aggregate provisions held against the country risk.
Banks shall routinely submit the assessment of Country Risk under ICAAP reporting.
Bangladesh Bank will routinely determine under onsite inspection and Supervisory
Review and Evaluation Process (SREP) that bank‘s policies and processed give due
regard to the identification, measurement, evaluation, monitoring, reporting and
control or mitigation of country risk risk. BB will also determine that the processes
are consistent with the risk profile, systemic importance and risk appetite of the bank,
taking into account market and macroeconomic condition, and provide a
comprehensive bank-wide view of country risk exposures. BB will also evaluate
whether exposures (including, where relevant, intra-group exposures) are identified,
monitored and managed on a regional and an individual country basis (in addition to
the end borrower/ end-counterparty basis).

--- Page 12 ---
11

Annex 1: Factors Affecting Country Risk
Macroeconomic Factors
The first of these factors is the size and structure of the country‘s external debt in relation to
its economy. More specifically:
The current level of short-term debt and the potential effect that a liquidity crisis
would have on the ability of otherwise creditworthy borrowers in the country to
continue servicing their obligations.
To the extent the external debt is owed by the public sector, the ability of the
government to generate sufficient revenues, from taxes and other sources, to service its
obligations.
The condition and vulnerability of the country‘s current account is also an important
consideration, including: The level of international reserves, including forward market
positions of the country‘s monetary authority (especially when the exchange rate is fixed).
The level of import coverage provided by the country‘s international reserves.
The importance of commodity exports as a source of revenue, the existence of any
price stabilization mechanisms, and the country‘s vulnerability to a downturn in either
its export markets or the price of an exported commodity.
The potential for sharp movements in exchange rates and the effect on the relative
price of the country‘s imports and exports.
The role of foreign sources of capital in meeting the country‘s financing needs is another
important consideration in the analysis of country risk, including:
The country‘s access to international financial markets and the potential effects of a
loss of market liquidity.
The country‘s relationships with private sector creditors, including the existence of
loan commitments and the attitude among bankers toward further lending to borrowers
in the country.
The country‘s current standing with multilateral and official creditors, including the
ability of the country to qualify for and sustain an International Monetary Fund or
other suitable economic adjustment program.

--- Page 13 ---
12

The trend in foreign investments and the country‘s ability to attract foreign investment
in the future.
The opportunities for privatization of government-owned entities.
The degree to which the economy of the country may be adversely affected through
the contagion of problems in other countries.

Past experience has highlighted the importance of a number of other important
macroeconomic considerations, including:
The degree to which the economy of the country may be adversely affected through
the contagion of problems in other countries.
The size and condition of the country‘s banking system, including the adequacy of the
country‘s system for bank supervision and any potential burden of contingent
liabilities that a weak banking system might place on the government.
The extent to which state-directed lending or other government intervention may have
adversely affected the soundness of the country‘s banking system, or the structure and
competitiveness of the favored industries or companies.
For both in-country and cross-border exposures, the degree to which macroeconomic
conditions and trends may have adversely affected the credit risk associated with

2. Social, Political and Legal Factors
The analysis of country risk should also take into consideration the country‘s social, political
and legal climate, including:
The willingness and ability of the government to recognize economic or budgetary
problems and implement appropriate remedial action.
The degree to which political or regional factionalism or armed conflicts are adversely
affecting government of the country.
Any trends toward government-imposed price, interest rate, or exchange controls.
The degree to which the country‘s legal system can be relied upon to fairly protect the
interests of foreign creditors and investors.
The accounting standards in the country and the reliability and transparency of
financial information.

--- Page 14 ---
13