--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular Letter No. 19 Date: December 03, 2023

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Wider scope in operations of Resident Foreign Currency Deposit (RFCD) accounts

Resident Bangladeshis are allowed to open and maintain RFCD accounts with foreign
exchange brought in at the time of their return from travel abroad. Any amount brought in with
declaration in FMJ (Foreign Money and Jewellery) form and up to 10,000 US dollar or its
equivalent brought in without declaration in cash as per Notification No. FE-1/2020-BB dated
February 03, 2020, can be credited to such accounts. Operational modalities of RFCD accounts
are outlined at section III, chapter 13 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions-2018,
Vol-1 (GFET) and its subsequent circulars. Section III of this chapter contains specified features
and privileges of RFCD accounts beneficial to account-holders.

02. This is to remind about the prevailing regulatory framework in this context as
outlined below:
(a) The balances held in the accounts are freely transferable abroad, including onward
foreign travels by account-holders (paragraph 22, chapter 13 of GFET).
(b) Account-holders can avail International Debit/Credit/Prepaid Card against the
balances held in RFCD accounts (paragraph 4, chapter 19 of GFET).
(c) Interest/profit is payable on the balances of RFCD accounts at eurocurrency deposit
rates (FE Circular No. 23 of July 24, 2018).

03. To widen the scope, the following facilities in RFCD account have been incorporated:

(a) RFCD accounts may be opened in any approved foreign currency such as USD, EUR,
GBP, JPY, AUD, CAD, CHF, CNH and SGD.
(b) Interest/profit will be payable on the deposits maintained for minimum one month at
mark-up of 1.50 percent over benchmark rate of respective currencies.
(c) Remittances can be effected on current transactions for dependents of account-
holders, in addition to transactions including but without limiting to cost of travel,
education for children, treatment, etc. for account-holders.

Cont’d to page-2

--- Page 2 ---
(d) Without limiting to account-holders themselves, maximum 2(two) supplementary
International Cards (debit/credit/prepaid) may be issued to dependents of account-
holders against RFCD accounts.
(e) The balances held in the accounts are freely encashable in Taka as and when
necessary.

04. ADs are advised to adhere to the regulatory instructions and provide seamless
services on RFCD accounts to resident Bangladeshis. Please bring the contents of this circular to
the notice of your relevant customers.

Yours faithfully,


Md. Sarwar Hossain
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123