--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 05 Date: March 19, 2023


All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,

Repayment of loans availed from Export Development Fund (EDF)

Please refer to paragraph 6 of FE Circular No. 45, dated December 31, 2017 and its
subsequent circulars regarding procedures and realization of principal and accrued interest on EDF
loans immediately upon expiry of the permissible periods by debit, unless repaid within due dates,
to FC clearing accounts of relevant Authorized Dealers (ADs) with Bangladesh Bank.

2. It is observed that EDF loans are not being realized in accordance with the instruction as
stated at FE Circular No. 45/2017. In view of the situation, it has been decided that penal interest
(compensation in case of Shariah based Islamic Banking) will be charged by Bangladesh Bank to
ADs at 4.00% pa above the prevailing interest rate on overdue amount of EDF loans for the delayed
period.

3. In accordance with the above decision, ADs will submit a debit authority to Bangladesh
Bank for realizing the principal and accrued interest, including penal interest/compensation (as the
case may be), at the time of application for EDF loan as per revised Form-A (copy enclosed).

Other relevant instructions on EDF shall remain unchanged. Please bring the contents of the
circular, effective immediately, to the notice of your relevant customers.



Yours faithfully,
Encl. As stated.

(Debashish Sarkar)
Director (FEPD) (In Charge)
Phone: 9530092

--- Page 2 ---
Form-A
(Letter head of AD bank)

Ref:









Date:

Director (FRTMD)
Forex Reserve and Treasury Management Department
EDF Section
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.

Dear Sir,

Application for Loan under EDF

In accordance with the procedure set out in Master Circular on Export Development Fund
dated December 31, 2017, we hereby apply for the loans from Bangladesh Bank against the
advances made by us in foreign currency under the following letters of credit:

Sl.
No.
Name of the
direct/ deemed
exporter
borrowing from
the AD
ERC No. &
Date
Import LC/inland
back to back LC
No. & date
Amount in
USD
Date of import
payment by raising
USD loan in the
name of the borrower


We confirm that the transactions are eligible for financing under EDF as per terms and
conditions stipulated in the aforesaid circular and hold ourselves liable for any falsity or
misstatement.
We would, therefore, request you to grant the loan and credit USD ……… (in words) to our
FC Clearing account maintained with you. We hereby authorize you to debit our FC Clearing
account maintained with Bangladesh Bank in realization of principal and accrued interest due upon
expiry of the permissible tenors of the loans, if not repaid earlier by us. In case of delay in
settlement of loans, we also authorize you to debit our account for penal interest/compensation (as
the case may be) at 4.00% pa above the prevailing interest for the delayed period.

Yours faithfully,


Signature........................
Name:………………….
Designation:...………….
PA No………....………..
Signature........................
Name:………………….
Designation:...………….
PA No………....………..