--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 19 Date: November 29, 2023


All Authorized Dealers in
foreign exchange in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,
Maintaining FC accounts by resident Bangladeshis and
others with Offshore Banking Operations




In accordance with the prevailing circular and guidelines, any scheduled commercial
bank can operate offshore banking in Bangladesh obtaining approval from Bangladesh Bank.
The BRPD circular No-02, dated 25th February 2019 has outlined the details of the approval
process, operational modalities and scope to conduct offshore banking operations(OBOs),
including acceptance of deposits in Foreign Currency(FC) from eligible customers.

02. To facilitate the said operations in a wider scale, it has been decided that persons
resident outside Bangladesh without limiting to non-resident Bangladeshi nationals, persons of
Bangladeshi origin, foreign nationals, companies/firms registered and operating abroad, foreign
institutional investors may open and maintain FC accounts in approved foreign currency with
OBOs.
03. It has also been decided that OBOs may maintain FC accounts termed as International
Banking (IB) accounts in the name of resident Bangladeshi individuals and corporate entities
including Type-A, Type-B and Type-C industrial enterprises operating in EPZs/EZs/HTPs
having bonafide relations with non-residents. In this context, IB account-holder will act as
facilitator of remitters and utilize the funds accordingly.

04. Accounts opened as per above mentioned procedures may be credited by inward
remittances received through official channel only.

05. OBOs are allowed to offer interest/profit considering benchmark reference rate in the
approved currency of deposits to be maintained in the form of term deposits, as mentioned
below:
Period of deposit
Ceiling rate
Up to 1 Year not less than 3
months
Benchmark reference rate + 1.5 percent
Above 1 year and up to 3 years
Benchmark reference rate + 2.25 percent
Above 3 years and up to 5 years
Benchmark reference rate + 3.25 percent



Continued page-02

--- Page 2 ---
-02-

06. Balances held in deposit accounts can be used for- (i) transfer to on-shore bank
accounts for meeting necessary payments and various investments; and (ii) making outward
remittances of balance amount including interest/profit as and when necessary.

07. All other instructions relating to the transactions of OBOs shall remain unchanged.

You are advised to bring the content of this circular to the notice of your OBOs for
meticulous compliance.

Yours faithfully,


Md. Sarwar Hossain
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123