--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 5

50080
BANGLADESH BANK


(The Central Bank of Bangladesh)

Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Website: www.bb.org.bd
SME & Special Programmes Department
SPCSSECP PMU


SMESPD (SPCSSECP) Circular No.: 02 Date:

Chief Executive Officer (CEO)/Managing Director (MD)
All Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh
Head Office
Dhaka.

Dear Sir,

Refinance Facility under ‘Supporting Post COVID-19 Small Scale Employment Creation
Project (SPCSSECP)’ to Support Cottage, Micro and Small Enterprises (CMSEs).


1. The Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh has constituted a Loan fund
considering the adverse economic impact of COVID-19 on the returning migrant
workers, unemployed youth and rural entrepreneurs with a special focus on women
entrepreneurs under the Supporting Post COVID-19 Small Scale Employment Creation
Project (SPCSSECP) funded by Asian Development Bank (ADB). Cottage, Micro and Small
Enterprises (CMSEs) will be financed under the project and such enterprises must be
started or operated by targeted vulnerable groups such as returning migrant workers,
unemployed youth and rural entrepreneurs.

2. The project composes of a financial intermediation loan of up to US$150 million from
the ordinary capital resources of ADB to the Government of Bangladesh. This fund will
facilitate access to finance for the targeted vulnerable groups. The Technical Assistance
(TA) is estimated to cost US$900,000 which will be financed on a grant basis to
strengthen the institutional capacity of the Bangladesh Bank and Participating Financial
Institutions (PFIs).

3. A Project Administration Manual (PAM) comprising essential administrative and
management requirements has been developed. The fund will be governed by the
Manual attached herewith (Attachment-1).

4. The Bangladesh Bank, the implementing agency of this project, shall enter into a
Participation Agreement with each qualified Bank/Financial Institution that meets the
eligibility criteria set out in the PAM to on-lend the fund to the qualified PFIs for making
sub loans to the eligible sub borrowers/end borrowers.
25 Falgun 1428
10 March 2022

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 5

5. Major Features of the Project:

Name of the Project
: Supporting Post COVID-19 Small Scale Employment Creation
Project (SPCSSECP)
ii.
Sources of Fund
: Asian Development Bank (ADB)
iii.
Size of the Project
: US$150 million (Tk.1,290 Crore; US$1 = Tk.86.00)
iv.
Duration of the Project
: 03.5 Years (January 2022-June 2025)
Purpose of the Project
: Restore employment, income and economic activities through
providing financial support to Cottage, Micro and Small
Enterprises (CMSEs) started or operated by returning migrant
workers, unemployed youth and rural entrepreneurs with a
special focus on women entrepreneurs.
vi.
Maximum Loan Limit
: BDT05 million (BDT50 Lac)
vii.
Repayment Term
: Maximum 5 years
viii.
Collateral
: PFIs will decide the collateral issues following the Bangladesh
Bank’s Prudential Guidelines and Circulars.
ix.
Target Group
: Cottage, Micro and Small Enterprises (CMSEs) as defined by
the Bangladesh Bank (SMESPD Circular No. 02, dated
05/09/2019 and subsequent changes thereon) and operated
by-
(a) Returning Migrant Workers (returned since the
beginning of 2020); or
(b) Unemployed or Underemployed Youth (age between
18-45 years old) who have received training from the
government approved institutions; or
(c) Rural Entrepreneurs residing outside Dhaka and
Chattogram Metropolitan Areas.
Special Criteria
: At least 20% of the qualified enterprises under the project
shall be women-led enterprises.
xi.
Interest Rate
(a) Refinance facility will be provided to the PFIs at the
rate of 1.50%
(b) The interest rate will be maximum 5.50% for the sub
borrowers/end borrowers.

6. Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) Selection Criteria:

(a) Each PFI must have Cottage, Micro and Small (CMS) lending commitment,
capacity and have a track record of performance on lending to the relevant
sectors.
(b) Each PFI must be compliant with applicable Prudential Regulations and
Guidelines of the Bangladesh Bank.
(c) Each PFI must have a minimum rating of 2 or better on the CAMELS-based
assessment carried out by the Bangladesh Bank. Each PFI must maintain required
rating throughout the period of the project, unless it is a target bank (a state
owned bank or financial institution owned by the government, or a bank or
financial institution established under a special act) for which Ministry of Finance
(MoF) has provided a guarantee for the repayment of the principal, interest and
other charges in favor of the Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 of 5

(d) The non-performing loan ratio must be lower than 10% unless it is a target bank
for which MoF has provided a guarantee in favor of the Bangladesh Bank.


(e) Committed to disburse at least US$03 million each year under this project.

7. Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) Agreement: All qualified and interested
Banks/Financial Institutions shall apply to the Bangladesh Bank as per Annexure-1 with
duly filled up templates (Annexure-2 and Annexure-3) to express their intention to
become a Participating Financial Institution (PFI) of the project. Eligible Banks/Financial
Institutions have to enter into a Participation Agreement to avail the refinance facility
under the project. Qualified Banks/Financial Institutions have to follow the rules and
regulations concerning to Cottage, Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (CMSMEs)
Financing stated in the SMESPD Circular No. 02, dated 05/09/2019 and subsequent
changes thereon and Project Administration Manual (PAM) of the project.

8. Procedure for Refinance Application: PFIs will apply to the Bangladesh Bank with duly
filled up templates (Annexure-4 & Annexure-5) attached with this Circular on a monthly
basis within 20 (Twenty) days of the following month to receive refinance facility against
disbursed loans and advances under the terms and conditions of the project. However, if
any PFI fails to apply for refinance facility against loans and advances within the
stipulated time mentioned above under any valid reason, that PFI may get additional
30 (thirty) days for submitting the refinance application which will be considered case to
case basis by the Project Management Unit (PMU). PFIs must submit copies of
entrepreneur’s Trade License, NID/Passport, Sanction Letter, Loan Statement and
Amortization Schedule along with other documents (Bill of Entry, LC documents, Invoice,
Quotation etc.) if necessary.

9. Limit of Loan and Refinance Facility: For any sub loan, PFIs shall not finance more than
80% of the total cost of qualified subprojects and sub borrowers/end borrowers must
contribute at least 20% of the equity in the business. The Bangladesh Bank shall provide
100% refinance against the loans and advances made by the PFIs to the qualified
sub borrowers/end borrowers. SMESPD Circular No. 02, dated 05/09/2019 (amended
thereinafter) and any other Circulars/Circular Letters which may be issued by the
Bangladesh Bank from time to time will be applicable for the highest loan limit of
Cottage, Micro and Small Enterprises (CMSEs). However, the amount of refinance facility
in individual cases shall not exceed Tk.50 (Fifty) Lac in any circumstances. Refinance
facilities will be made available to the PFIs on ‘First Come, First Served’ basis and subject
to the availability of the fund in this project.

10. Types of Sub Loans: Under this project, refinance facility will be available for Working
Capital/Short Term, Medium Term and Long Term Loan. Working Capital/Short Term
Loan will be for 01 (One) year, Medium Term Loan will be for maximum 03 (Three) years
and Long Term Loan will be for maximum 05 (Five) years in tenure. However, PFIs may

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 5

provide maximum 06 months grace period to the sub borrowers/end borrowers and
such grace period shall be incorporated in refinancing the sub loans.
11. Sub Loans & Sub Borrower/End Borrower Criteria: To avail the refinance facility from
the project a qualified sub borrower must fulfill the terms and conditions as set forth in
the Appendix 03 of the Project Administration Manual (PAM) and other
Circulars/Circular Letters which may be issued by the Bangladesh Bank from time to
time.

12. Women-led Enterprise: A qualified enterprise shall be considered as a Women-led
Enterprise on the following grounds:
(a) If women are the owners or proprietors of a privately-run enterprise or
own at least a 51% share of the enterprise; or
(b) If at least 60% of its managerial staffs are women; or
(c) As defined by the Bangladesh Bank, provided that for the purposes of the
project, such definition shall be agreed between the Bangladesh Bank and
ADB.

13. Recovery of Refinanced amount: The amount received as refinance facility by the PFIs
from the project shall be repayable to the Bangladesh Bank as follows:
(a) It is the sole responsibility of the respective PFI to recover the loans and
advances made to the beneficiary under this project; there will be no
relation whatsoever between recovery of loans and advances from the
beneficiary and repayment of fund taken as refinance under this project
to SPCSSECP of the Bangladesh Bank.

(b) Working Capital/Short Term Loans will be repayable at the end of the
loan period in a single installment (which includes both principal &
interest).

(c) Total principal and interest amount of medium & long term loan will be
repayable on equal quarterly installment from the date of receiving
refinance and the tenure of the refinance facility will be same as
mentioned in the Sanction Letter of the PFIs.


(d) The Bangladesh Bank will realize the refinanced amount along with
interest, any kind of charges and penalty (if any) by debiting their current
account maintained with Motijheel Office of the Bangladesh Bank.


14. Environmental and Social Management System Arrangement: All interested Banks/
Financial Institutions are required to follow Environmental and Social Risk Management
(ESRM) Guidelines of the Bangladesh Bank as well as Environmental and Social
Management System Arrangement (ESMSA) of the project issued by ADB
(Attachment-2) during providing CMSEs loan to the targeted groups.

--- Page 5 ---
15.

16.

17.

18.

Document Requisition and Project Inspection: If necessary, the Bangladesh Bank may
ask for the necessary documents and conduct on-site inspection before or after the
approval of refinance facilities at any time without prior notice.

Demand Promissory (DP) Note Submission, Early Settlement, Collateral, Schedule of
charges, Insufficient Fund & other Relevant Issues: SMESPD Circular No. 02, dated
05/09/2019 and subsequent changes thereon and related other Circulars and Guidelines
of the Bangladesh Bank have to be followed regarding submission of DP Note, early
settlement process, collateral, schedule of charges, insufficient fund & other relevant
issues.

Other Instructions:
(a) All PFls have to submit periodic statement as specified by the Bangladesh
Bank related to the refinance scheme under the project as and when
required by the Bangladesh Bank.
(b) Sanction Letter and Repayment Schedule should be prepared based on the
interest rate mentioned in the 5(xi)(b) of this Circular.


The selection of sub borrower/end borrower, approval of loans and
advances, disbursement, and maintenance of debt-equity ratio, margin,
insurance against loans and advances, end-use and monitoring activities
will be determined according to the Circulars and Guidelines of the
Bangladesh Bank and performed by the Rules of Business of respective
PFls and Banker-Customer relationship in general.

Submission of Application: Interested Banks and Fls are requested to go through the
Project Administration Manual (PAM) before applying as per Annexure-1 (Accreditation
Application format). Application must be supported with all required information and
documents stated in the Annexure-2, Annexure-3 and Project Administration Manual
(PAM). Incomplete applications will not be entertained.

This Circular is issued under the power conferred by the Section 45 of the Bank Company
Act, 1991 and the Section 18(CHH) of the Financial Institutions Act, 1993.

This Circular shall come into force with immediate effect.

Yours Sincerel

Attachment: As stated above (Page-78). [O08

(Rojina Akter Mustafi)
Deputy General Manager
Deputy Project Director, SPCSSECP
Phone: 9530025

Page 5 of 5

--- Page 6 ---
Annexure-1
(Accreditation Application Format)


Project Director
Supporting Post COVID-19 Small Scale Employment Creation Project (SPCSSECP)
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka-1000

Dear Sir,

Letter of Intent to become Participating Financial Institution (PFI) under ‘Supporting
Post COVID-19 Small Scale Employment Creation Project (SPCSSECP)’


With reference to the SMESPD (SPCSSECP) Circular No.: 02/2022 dated 10/03/2022 we
would like to express our interest for participating in the Supporting Post COVID-19 Small Scale
Employment Creation Project (SPCSSECP). The documents are attached herewith as required for
your kind consideration. We also furnish the information as sought in the annexure of the Circular
and in the Project Administration Manual (PAM).

We, therefore, request you to consider our application and allow us to work with you for
the development of CMSE sectors in Bangladesh through our active participation in Supporting Post
COVID-19 Small Scale Employment Creation Project (SPCSSECP) finance.


Truly yours,
Date:







CEO/MD
Bank/FI Name

--- Page 7 ---
Annexure-2
(Business Information Form)
Business Statements
Name of the Bank/FI:
Serial
No.
Criteria
Statement
Year/
Amount
Put Tick Mark
Based on
Reference
Value
Reference
Value
Legality
Date of License Received from the Bangladesh Bank

N/A
N/A
Operational Experience
Establishment Year

Yes
No
( ≥ 5 years)
Commitment to CMSEs Lending
Commitment to provide financial support to Cottage, Micro and Small Enterprises (CMSEs)
operated by returning migrant workers, unemployed youth and rural entrepreneurs with a
special focus on women entrepreneurs.
N/A
Yes
No
N/A
Capital Adequacy (for the last year)

i. Net Worth
Taka in million (as on ..……………………... )

N/A
N/A
ii. Paid-up Capital
Taka in million (as on ..……………………... )

N/A
N/A
iii. Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR)
CAR as on ………………………………... (Evaluted by Bangladesh Bank)

Yes
No
( > 10%)
Profitability: Net Profit (for last 02 years)
Taka in million (for the Year Ending …………………………...)

Yes
No
Taka in million (for the Year Ending …………………………...)

Yes
No
Non-Performing Loan (NPL) of the Last
Quarter
NPL Ratio: (as on ………………………………...)

Yes
No
( < 10%)
CAMELS Rating (Latest)
(as on ..……………………...)

Yes
No
Target Bank
Target bank will be defined as per SMESPD (SPCSSECP) Circular No.:02; dated: 10/03/2022
N/A
Yes
No
N/A
Fulfilling the Prudential Regulations:

i. Transparency
N/A
Yes
No
N/A
ii. Corporate Governance
Yes
No
iii. Risk Management
Yes
No
iv. AML Requirements
Yes
No
v. Green Banking Guidelines
Yes
No
vi. Others, if any
Yes
No
10
Copy of Audited Financial Statements for the last 2 years (as attached)
Yes
No
11
Others, if any, Please Mention and Attach in Separate Page
Yes
No

--- Page 8 ---
Annexure-3
(Financial Information Form)

Financial Statements
Name of the Bank/FI:
(in million taka)
Description
(Year)*
Share of
Total (%)
Growth (%)
(Year)*
Share of
Total (%)
Growth (%)
(Year)*
Share of
Total (%)
Growth (%)
10
Balance Sheet
Cash & Cash Equivalents









Short Term Liquid Assets









Net Loans and Advances









Others Assets









Total Assets









Deposit from Customers









Due to Banks & NBFIs









Others Liabilities









Total Liabilities









Share Capital









Other Reserves









Retained Earnings









Total Equity









Total Equity & Liabilities









Income Statement
Interest Income









Non-interest Income









Total Revenue









Net Interest Income









Net Non-interest Income









Total Net Revenue (Operating Income)









Operating Expenses









Contingent Risk Expenses









Net Non-operating Income









Profit Before Tax









Net Profit

--- Page 9 ---
Annexure-3
(Financial Information Form)


(continued….)
Description
(Year)*
Share of
Total (%)
Growth (%)
(Year)*
Share of
Total (%)
Growth (%)
(Year)*
Share of
Total (%)
Growth (%)
10
Operational Ratio
Capital Adequacy Ratio (>10%)
Liquidity









Single Borrower Exposure (<20%)









Forex Exposure (<40%)









ADR









LDR









NPL









ROE









ROA










* Provide Information for Latest Years.

--- Page 10 ---
Sl. No.
Description
Remarks
Name of Bank/Financial Institution (FI)
Date of Application
Financing Period
Type of Loan
Tenure
Working capital/Short Term
≥ 1 Years
Mid Term
1-3 Years
Long Term
3-5 Years
Total
Number
Amount (In BDT)
Number
Amount (In BDT)
Working capital/Short Term
Mid Term
Long Term
Total
Type of Entrepreneur
New
Existing
Total
Type of Borrower
First Time Borrower
Old Borrower
Total
Type of Enterprise
Cottage
Micro
Small
Total
Type of Project
Manufacturing
Service
Trading
Total
Number
Amount (In BDT)
Number
Small Enterprise Refinance Scheme
Refinance Scheme for Agro-based Industries
New Entrepreneur Refinance Scheme
Islamic Shariah-based Refinance Fund
COVID-19 Refinance Scheme
JICA FSPDSME
JICA UBSP
SREUP
Covid-19 ECRF Project
SMEDP2
Others ( If any please mentioned)
Total
Date
No
No
No
No
No
No
Date:
Name of the Scheme/Project
10
Capital
Amount (In BDT)
Number
Amount (In BDT)
Eligibility to Apply for Refinancing Faclity from SPCSSECP
Number
Amount (In BDT)
Number
Amount (In BDT)
Balance (outstanding) with BB
Details of Refinance Facility Availed by the Bank/FI from other Funds/Projects of Bangladesh Bank and Current Balance:
Amount (In BDT)/Ratio
Financial Information of the Bank/FI at the end of Last Quarter
Capital Adequacy Ratio
Head Office, Dhaka
Supporting Post COVID-19 Small Scale Employment Creation Project (SPCSSECP)
Entrepreneurial Level Description of the Financed Sub-Projects under this Application:
Application for Sanctioning Refinance
Relevant Information
Details of the Refinance Application:
Number
Amount (In BDT)
Amount of Refinance (availed) and Balance (outstanding) by the Bank/FI under this Project:
Refinance (Availed )
Balance (outstanding) with BB
Category of Loan
Number
Amount (In BDT)
Annexure-4
(Application for Sanctioning Refinance)
Seal
11
(Signature)
Head of SME
Type of Sub-Projects Financed under this Application:
………. Years
Yes
Yes
Yes
Compliance on Risk Management and Anti-Money Laundering related
Regulations
Compliance of Refinance Based on SMESPD (SPCSSECP) Circular
General Declaration
Please Put Tick Mark
Bangladesh Bank
Yes
Whether Enterprise(s) is(are) located outside Dhaka and Chattogram
Metropolitan areas?
Whether Enterprise(s) is(are) Defaulter(s)?
12
Yes
Yes
Refinance (Availed )
CRR
SLR
Business Experience of the PFIs
Compliance on Single or Group Borrower’s Exposure related Policy or
Guidelines
Percentage of Non-performing Loan against Total Disbursement
Advance Deposit Ratio/Loan to Fund Ratio

--- Page 11 ---
Male
Female
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
Statement of Loan Applied for Refinance Under SPCSSECP
Name of the Bank/FI:
Name of the Financing Month:
Remarks
Date of
Disbursement
Number of
Employee
Purpose of
Loan
Loan Limit
(In BDT)
Amount of
Disbursed
Loan (In BDT)
Interest
Rate (%)
Grace
Period
(Month)
Nature
of Loan
Nature of
CMSE
Owner's
Equity
Annexure-5
(Statement of Loan Applied for Refinance)
Nature of
Business
Name/ Type
of Product
Sl.
No.
Name of the
Enterprise and
Date of
Incorporation
Location/
Address of the
Enterprise
Type of
Ownership
Name of
Owner(s),
Age, NID and
Phone
Number
Ownership by
Gender
Target
Group
Fixed Assets
of the
Enterprise
(Excluding
Land &
Building)
Districts
and
Divisions
Name of
Financing
Branch
Annual
Sales
Turnover
(In Crore)
Type of
Project
Tenure of
Loan
(Month)

--- Page 12 ---
Annexure-6
(Contact Details)


Contact details of Relevant Personnel

Name of the PFI:

Sl.
No.
Name of the
Nominated
Officials
Assigned for this
Project Related
Communication
Mailing Address
Electronic Communications
Address Line 1
Address Line 2
City
Post
Code
Phone
Number
Fax Number
Cell phone
Number
E-mail

--- Page 13 ---
Attachment-1



Project Administration Manual





Supporting Post COVID-19 Small Scale
Employment Creation Project (SPCSSECP)

Project Number: 54336-001
October 2021
(RRP BAN 54336)

--- Page 14 ---
ABBREVIATIONS

ADB
Asian Development Bank
CMSE
cottage, micro, small enterprise
COVID-19
coronavirus disease
FMA
financial management assessment
GAP
gender action plan
MOF-FD
Ministry of Finance–Finance Division
PFI
participating financial institution
PMU
project management unit
PPMS
project performance management system
SOE
statement of expenditures
TA
technical assistance

--- Page 15 ---
CONTENTS
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
II.
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS
Project Readiness Activities
Overall Project Implementation Plan
III.
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities
Key Persons Involved in Implementation
Project Organization Structure
IV.
COSTS AND FINANCING
Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions
Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds
Disbursement S-Curve
10
Fund Flow Diagram
11
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
11
Financial Management Assessment
11
Disbursement
16
Accounting
17
Auditing and Public Disclosure
17
VI.
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES
19
Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing
19
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services
19
VII.
SAFEGUARDS
19
VIII.
GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS
20
IX.
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND
COMMUNICATION
22
Project Design and Monitoring Framework
22
Monitoring
24
Evaluation
24
Reporting
25
Stakeholder Communication Strategy
25
ANTICORRUPTION POLICY
25
XI.
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM
26
XII.
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL
26
APPENDIXES
Annual Environmental and Social Monitoring Report ..................................................... 28
Participating Financial Institutions Selection Criteria ..................................................... 30
Subloan and Subborrower Criteria ................................................................................. 32
Quarterly/Annual Monitoring Report ............................................................................. 33
Semiannual Gender Action Monitoring Report ............................................................... 39

--- Page 16 ---
Project Administration Manual Purpose and Process

The project administration manual (PAM) describes the essential administrative and
management requirements to implement the project on time, within budget, and in accordance
with the policies and procedures of the government and Asian Development Bank (ADB). The
PAM should include references to all available templates and instructions either through
linkages to relevant URLs or directly incorporated in the PAM.

The Finance Division of the Ministry of Finance as the executing agency and Bangladesh
Bankas the implementing agency, are wholly responsible for the implementation of ADB-
financed projects, as agreed jointly between the borrower and ADB, and in accordance with
the policies and procedures of the government and ADB. ADB staff is responsible for
supporting implementation including compliance by Finance Division of the Ministry of Finance
and Bangladesh Bank of their obligations and responsibilities for project implementation in
accordance with ADB‘s policies and procedures.

At loan negotiations, the borrower and ADB shall agree to the PAM and ensure consistency
with the loanagreement. Such agreement shall be reflected in the minutes of the loan
negotiations. In the event of any discrepancy or contradiction between the PAM and the
loanagreement, the provisions of the loanagreement shall prevail.

After ADB Board approval of the project's report and recommendations of the President (RRP),
changes in implementation arrangements are subject to agreement and approval pursuant to
relevant government and ADB administrative procedures (including the Project Administration
Instructions) and upon such approval, they will be subsequently incorporated in the PAM.

--- Page 17 ---
PROJECT DESCRIPTION


The Supporting Post-COVID-19 Small-Scale Employment CreationProject composes of
a financial intermediation loan of up to $150 million from Asian Development Bank (ADB)‘s
ordinary capital resources to the Government of Bangladesh. The funds will be onlent to
Bangladesh Bank, the nation‘s central bank, for on-lending to participating financial institutions
(PFIs). The PFIs will further onlend the funds to cottage, micro,and smallenterprises
(CMSEs)started or operated by targeted vulnerable groups—unemployed youth, returning
migrant workers, and rural entrepreneurs with a focus on women entrepreneurs. The attached
transaction technical assistance (TA) amounting to $900,000 will help strengthen the
institutional capacity of Bangladesh Bank and PFIs and will promote formal banking support for
CMSEs.

The impact of the project will be the rapid recovery from coronavirus disease (COVID-
19) to restore employment, income, and economic activities. The outcome is adverse economic
effects of COVID-19 on migrants, youth, and rural entrepreneurs mitigated. There are three
outputs: (i) financial support to enterprises started or operated by migrants, rural enterprises,
and youth from the formal banking sector increased; (ii) capacity of employment-supporting
institutions strengthened; and (iii) action plan for promoting formal banking sector support for
CMSEs developed.

II.
IMPLEMENTATION PLANS
Project Readiness Activities
Table 1: Project Readiness Activities
Indicative Activities
2021
2022
Responsible
Unit
Jun
Jul
Aug Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
Financial due diligence
on participating
commercial
banks conducted










ADB
Stakeholder analysis and
consultation have been
undertaken and are
reflected in the project
Documents









ADB
Major risks (including
governance) have been
identified, and mitigating
measures are indicated








ADB
Establish project
implementation
arrangements










ADB
ADB Board approval










ADB
Loan and project
agreements signing










ADB, MOF,
Bangladesh
Bank, PFIs
Government legal
opinion provided










MOF
Project
management unit in
Bangladesh Bank
established











Bangladesh
Bank
ADB confirms acceptability
of PFI‘s‘ use of the











PFIs

--- Page 18 ---
Indicative Activities
2021
2022
Responsible
Unit
Jun
Jul
Aug Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
subproject
screening checklist
Signing of the subsidiary
loan agreements
between MOF and
Bangladesh Bank











MOF,
Bangladesh
Bank
Loan effectiveness










ADB
Onlending arrangements
between Bangladesh
Bank and PFIs are in
place








ADB,
Bangladesh
Bank,
PFIs
ADB = Asian Development Bank, MOF = Ministry of Finance, PFI = participating financial institution.
Source:Asian Development Bank.

--- Page 19 ---
Overall Project Implementation Plan

The scheduled implementation period for the project is 3.5 years (January 2022–June 2025).

Table 2: Implementation PlanKey Activities with Milestones
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Financial support to enterprises started or operated by migrants,
rural enterprises, and youth from the formal banking sector
increased




















1.1
Disburse $40 million through Bangladesh Bank to PFIs by Q4 2022




















1.2
Disburse an additional $50 million through BB to PFIs Q4 2023




















1.3
Disburse an additional $50 million through BB to PFIs by Q4 2024




















1.4
Disburse an additional $10 million through BB to PFIs by Q2 2025




















Capacity of employment-supporting institutions strengthened




















2.1
Consultants support the PFIs and potential PFIs to enhance the
financial inclusive strategies by Q4 2022




















2.2
Consultants support the PFIs and potential PFIs to enhance the policy
frameworks by Q4 2022




















2.3
Consultants support the PFIs and potential PFIs to develop guidelines
for credit department and various committees by Q4 2022




















2.4
PFIs take steps to improve underwriting standards to enhance quality
of the loan portfolio by Q4 2023




















2.5
Consultants support the development of procurement plans for the
MIS by Q2 2023




















2.6
Capacity building activities for PMU and PFI officials on underwriting
standards, risk management, GESI mainstreaming and environmental
and social safeguards by Q4 2023




















Action plan for promoting formal banking sector support for
cottage, micro and small enterprises developed




















3.1
Action plan developed and discussed with Bangladesh Bank, the
MOF, and related agencies by Q3 2023




















3.2
Training and knowledge event conducted for the PMU, PFIs, and
stakeholders to promote best practices by Q3 2023




















3.3
Online platform developed to make training materials available to
broader audiences by Q1 2023




















3.4
Outreach conducted, including online, to increase awareness of the
program by Q1 2025




















GESI = gender equality and social inclusion, MIS = management information system, MOF = Ministry of Finance, PFI = participating financial institution, PMU =
project management unit, Q = quarter, TA = technical assistance.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

--- Page 20 ---
III.
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS
Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities
Steering Committee
For the smooth implementation of the project within the framework of the CMSEs
promotion policy of the Government of Bangladesh, the steering committeewill be established at
ministry level.

TheSenior Secretary of Ministry of Finance–Finance Division (MOF-FD), or his
representative, will be the Chairman of the Steering Committee. The members will be:
a representative from Bangladesh Bank;
(ii)
a representative from MOF-FD;
(iii)
a representative from Ministry of Finance-Financial Institutions Division;
(iv)
a representative from Ministry of Finance-Economics Relations Division; and
others who may be considered necessary by the government.

The role of the Secretariat will be performed by the project management unit (PMU) of
Bangladesh Bank. ADB will participate as an observer.

The principal function of the steering committee is to discuss and make decisions on
policy issues relevant to the implementation and management of the project, inter alia:
review, consider, and approve major policy changes of operating guidelines;
(ii)
supervision of the project;
(iii)
important issues related to the implementation of the project, policy formulation
for CMSE development; and
(iv)
any other issues related to the smooth operation of the project.

The steering committee will convene at least once every half year but can be held on an
ad hoc basis if any issue arises to be discussed immediately.

Project Management Unit
To ensure a smooth implementation of the projectintervention, a PMU will be established
no later than 1 month after ADB Board approval, with a project director, a deputy project
director, two project managers, and six project officers who will specifically handle all relevant
tasks related to this project. Moreover, one receptionist and one member of lower staff service
(outsourced) should be included in the PMU to facilitate the PMU activities.

10.
The project director will be primarily responsible for the project implementation and shall
mobilize any further staff resources necessary for the smooth implementation of the project
through appropriate authority of Bangladesh Bank. All the project officials must be posted in the
PMU on deputationand assigned full time for this project. Bangladesh Bank will assign one
deputy general manager from the Small and Medium-sized Enterprise Development Projectas
deputy project director. The PMU will be staffed with officials who have prior knowledge on ADB
project implementation and management from similar CMSE projects.

--- Page 21 ---
11.
The structure of PMU will be as shown below in Figure 1.



12.
The various functions of the PMU, which include implementation, administration, and
operation of the project on behalf of the implementing agencyare shown below:
General Administration and Treasury Section
Coordination with Bangladesh Bank‘s other departments for general
affairs;
Provision of necessary administrative assistance for other sections of the
PMU;
Due maintenance of the advance account,0F1 project operating account,
and revolving fund account established for the loan administration;
Instruction to the Accounts and Budgeting Department to transfer funds to
be paid by PFI to the revolving fund account, Bangladesh Bank‘s revenue
account, and Ministry of Finance‘s revenue account;
Preparation of statements of the project accounts; and
Full cooperation to external audit of the advance account, the project
operating account, and the revolving fund account as well as to the
external audit for statement of expenditures (SOEs).

(ii)
Loan Administration
Conducting the accreditation of PFIs, including annual reviews;
Concluding a participation agreement with PFIs;

1 Advance account is equivalent to the terminology ―imprest account‖ used in Bangladesh Bank and Finance Division
of MOF.

--- Page 22 ---
Review of subloans applications from PFIs;
Approval and disbursement of the funds to PFIs;
Recovery of subloans from PFIs as per recover schedule;
Daily monitoring of onlending loans and subloans; and
Preparation of quarterly progress reports and project completion report.

Table 3: Project Implementation Organizations: Roles and Responsibilities
Project Implementation
Organizations
Management Roles and Responsibilities
Executing agency
Ministry of Finance–Finance Division
Responsible for the overall project implementation and provides project
implementation guidance
Organize Steering Committee meetings
Liaise with ADB for any project implementation issues
Provide necessary implementation support to Bangladesh Bank
Sign the subsidiary agreement with Bangladesh Bank and monitor
compliance
Project steering committee
Provide overarching guidance and policy level support to the project
Monitor and review project performance at an inter-agency level and
address key policy-related issues
Ensure collaboration and cooperation among agencies
Implementing agency
Bangladesh Bank
Assess PFI eligibility in coordination with ADB
Monitor PFIs‘ compliance with loan conditions and achievements of the
project‘s design and monitoring framework targets
Timely submit withdrawal applications to ADB
Responsible for the allocation of the loan to the PFIs
Responsible for the administration of the advance account, submission of
the withdrawal applications, retention of supporting documents, and any
reporting requirements
Support the TA activities by providing timely support, guidance, inputs,
access to information, and in-kind contributions
Implement the use of the subproject screening checklist by the PFIs and
the Gender Action Plan
Submit to ADB quarterly progress reports within 30 days from the end of
each quarter and respond to other information requests
Ensure PFIs‘ submission of statement of utilization of funds, and submit
audited statement of utilization of funds on behalf of PFIs
Submit to ADB annual safeguards monitoring report
Monitor PFIs‘ compliance with project agreement covenants
Represent the project and participate in portfolio review meetings organized
by the government and ADB
Submit a project completion report within 6 months of project closure
PFIs
Assess credit worthiness of subborrowers and financial viability of
subprojects
Implement and ensure compliance with the selection criteria for
subborrowers, subproject, and subloans; and criteria for the maximum loan
size, and covenants in project agreement
Ensure that total subloans (number) to small enterprises are issued to at
least 20% women-led small enterprises under the credit line
Ensure that the qualified subborrowers comply with ADB's Safeguard Policy
Statement and applicable environmental, health and safety, and social laws
and regulations of the borrowers
Provide capacity building and business support activities to the targeted
vulnerable groups and women‘s entrepreneurs on financial and legal
literacy related to access to financial resources and services
Manage budgeting, financial planning, accounting, and auditing of project-

--- Page 23 ---
related activities
Submit to Bangladesh Bank annual Statements of Utilization of Funds in
ADB template, incompliance with financial covenants
ADB
Responsible for overall coordination of the project
Provide guidance to Bangladesh Bankregarding implementation of the
project
Monitor achievements of the project‘s targets established in the design and
monitoring framework
Conduct field reviews on implementation twice a year
Oversee implementation of attached TA
ADB = Asian Development Bank, PFI = participating financial institution, TA = technical assistance.
Source:Asian Development Bank.

Key Persons Involved in Implementation
Executing Agency

Finance Division,
Ministry of Finance
Dr. Md. Khairuzzaman Mozumder
Additional Secretary
Tel. No.: +880 1711566958
E-mail: kzamanm@finance.gov.bd

Financial Division, Ministry of Finance
Bangladesh Secretariat
Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh

Implementing Agency

Bangladesh Bank
Mr. Md. Jaker Hossain
General Manager
Tel. No.: +880 1731509242
E-mail: mjaker.hossain@bb.org.bd

SME & Special Programmes Department
Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh

Asian Development Bank

Public Management, Financial
Sector, and Trade Division
South Asia Department
Mr. Sabyasachi Mitra
Director
Tel No.: +63 2 8632 5514
E-mail: sabymitra@adb.org
Mission Leader
Mr. Dongdong Zhang
Principal Financial Sector Specialist
Tel. No.: +63 85512366
E-mail: dzhang@adb.org

--- Page 24 ---
Project Organization Structure



































IV.
COSTS AND FINANCING
13.
The government has requested a concessional loan of $150 million from ADB‘s ordinary
capital resources to help finance the project. The loan will have a 25-year term, including a
grace period of 5 years; an interest rate of 2.0% per year during the grace period and thereafter;
and such other terms and conditions set forth in the draft loan and project agreements.

14.
The government will relend the loan proceeds to Bangladesh Bank under a subsidiary
loan agreement, denominated in local currency. The government will determine the relending
rate and will bear the foreign exchange risk. Bangladesh Bank will onlend the funds to PFIs at
an interest rate in line with the rates for other Bangladesh Bank programs supporting
CMSMEs.1F2 The loans from PFIs to eligible CMSEs will have a market-based lending rate that
reflects the funding cost of the PFIs and the credit risk of the subborrowers that is determined by
Bangladesh Bank and agreeable to ADB; and will have a maximum maturity of 5 years and a
maximum loan size of Tk5.0 million.



2 Bangladesh Bank‘s CMSME support programs have interest rates of 2%–4%.

--- Page 25 ---
Table 4. Project Financing Plan
Source
Amount
($ million)
Share of Total
Asian Development Bank
(concessional loan)
150.0
100.0
TOTAL
150.0
100.0
a This is based on the assumption that CMSEs will contribute 20% of individual subproject cost in form of equity.
Source: Asian Development Bank.

Cost Estimates Preparation and Revisions
15.
The cost estimates were prepared by the Government of Bangladesh in consultation
with ADB. No cost revision is expected during project implementation.

Detailed Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category
Table 5. Cost Estimates by Expenditure Category
Source
Amount
($ million)
Share of Total
Credit Line
150.0
100.0
TOTAL
150.0
100.0
Source: Asian Development Bank.

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds
16.
ADB loan (ADB to Bangladesh). Thegovernment will be the borrower. The ADB loan,
through the MOF–FD, will onlend to Bangladesh Bank in local currency under a subsidiary loan
agreement. government will bear the foreign exchange risks.

17.
Relending
(from
Bangladesh
Bank
to
participating
financial
institutions).Bangladesh Bank will relend the proceeds of the ADB loan to eligible PFIsfor
making subloans to eligible subborrowers to finance eligible subprojects at prevailing rate for
CMSE programs under a participation agreement. 2F3 The relending will have a maturity of 2–5
years (generally matches the profiles of subloans) at an interest rate of prevailing bank lending
rate determined by Bangladesh Bank and agreeable to ADB.

18.
Eligibility criteria of partner finance institutions. PFIs participating in the project must
be licensed by Bangladesh Bank or established under special act or regulation of the
government. In addition, PFIs must meet the eligibility criteria laid out in Appendix 2.

19.
Eligibility criteria of borrowers.Enterprises to be financed under the project shall
belong to the three vulnerable groups—(i) youth, (ii) returning migrants, and (iii) rural
entrepreneurs.3F4These groups should meet the eligibility criteria laid out in Appendix 3.


3 Eligibility criteria for participating financial institutions (PFIs), subprojects and subborrowers (accessible from the list
of linked documents in Appendix 2.
4 Youth refers to individual between 18 and 45years old; returning migrants refers to individuals returned to the
country since beginning of 2020; rural entrepreneurs refer to the entrepreneurs based outside of Dhaka and
Chattogrammetropolitan areas.

--- Page 26 ---
10



20.
Loan proceeds utilization. ADB loan proceeds will be used to finance eligible PFI‘s
qualified CMSEs.4F5 Subloans will be for activities that will not trigger any involuntary
resettlements nor have any adverse impact on tribes, minor races, ethnic sects, and
communities. The maximum size for subloans under the credit line will be Tk5 million. The total
cost of each subproject will be jointly financed with a subborrower equity contribution of 20%,
and a contribution from the ADB loan of 80%. Subloans may be used for working capital or long-
term investment and must be repaid with a maximum term of 5 years. Though the funds will
prioritize cottage and micro enterprises,small enterprises outside of Dhaka and Chattagram
metropolitan areas, may avail only up to $40 million of the loan proceeds. Subloans will only be
provided to finance activities not listed in ADB‘s Prohibited Investment Activities List and will be
subject to post-lending monitoring and review by ADB.

Disbursement S-Curve
21.
The disbursement schedule for the project period of 2022‒2025 is expected to be in
annual amounts of $40 million, $50 million, $50 million, and $10 million.








5 Rural enterprises in this paper refer to enterprises located outside of Dhaka and Chattogram metropolitan area.

--- Page 27 ---
11









Fund Flow Diagram
22.
The disbursement will be conducted through advance account procedure.




FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Financial Management Assessment
23.
The financial management assessment (FMA) was conducted in May 2021 in
accordance with ADB‘s Guidelines on Financial Due Diligence..6 The FMA considered the
capacity of the Bangladesh Bank, and Karmasangsthan Bank,a potential PFI, including fund-
flow arrangements, staffing, accounting and financial reporting systems, financial information
systems, and internal and external auditing arrangements.

24.
The executing agency for the project will be MOF-FD and Bangladesh Bank will be the

6 ADB. 2009. Financial Due Diligence: A Methodology Note. Manila.

--- Page 28 ---
12



implementing agency. MOF-FD is experienced with working with donor programs including
ADB‘s. The FMA found that Bangladesh Bank has experience in implementing ADB-assisted
projects,namely: (i) the Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Development Projectand (ii)
Second Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Development Project.7Bangladesh Bank‘s project
management and financial management capacities were further enhanced under these ADB
projects and projects from other development partners. Bangladesh Bank has adequate
financial management capacity to (i) provide reliable annual statement of utilization of funds and
audit reports in a timely manner; (ii) design and implement effective mechanism to monitor
program implementation by PFIs; and (iii) manage the advance account and the SOE
procedures under ADB‘s disbursement procedures. However, Bangladesh Bank still needs to
further strengthen its capacity and staff to meet the challenges of supporting vulnerable groups,
disbursing funds efficiently, and delivering policies and strategies for financial inclusion. The
attached TA will support the capacity development of PMU officials, strengthen Bangladesh
Bank‘s information technology system, provide business support for the borrowers, and support
policy development.

25.
The FMA concluded that the financial management risk is moderate, primarily due to
risks coming from (i) increasing outstanding loan levels due to deterioration in macroeconomic
conditions in the aftermath of COVID-19, and (ii) capacity constraints in some of the
participating financial institutions. Mitigation factors considered are Bangladesh Bank‘s strong
financial management capacity, conservative approach and experience working with ADB and
many other development partners in similar projects.

26.
The financial management internal control and risk assessment examines the proposed
project on two levels—inherent and control risks. Inherent risks consider risks that are inherent
to financial institutions in Bangladesh projects while control risks consider risks that are unique
to Bangladesh Bank and the subprojects (Table 6).

Table 6: Financial Management Risk Assessment
Risk
Risk Assessment
Risk
Rating
Risk-Mitigation Measures
Inherent Risks
1. Country-
specific Risks
The financial management
systems of Bangladesh are
reasonably well developed but
there are issues related to
inadequate policy budgeting,
governance concerns and limited
scrutiny of external audit reports.
Bangladesh has undertaken a number of
initiatives to improve the quality of its financial
management systems.
Considering the global indicators, it is
deemed essential to continue the effort of
improving its performance as a key priority
to achieve the country‘s development
aspirations.

The core financial management systems are
targeted for improvement through strengthening
of core public institutions.
2. Financial
Sector Specific
Risks
Poor financial management
practices in the banking and
nonbank financial sector could
undermine the stability of the
Financial institutions play a vital role of
intermediation and serve the diverse financial
needs of the growing economy. The magnitude
of their role underscores the importance of

7 ADB. 2009. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan to the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the Second Small and Medium-sized Enterprise Development Project. Manila.
and ADB. 2015. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors: Proposed Loan and
Administration of Technical Assistance Grant to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the Second Small and
Medium-sized Enterprise Development Project. Manila.

--- Page 29 ---
13



Risk
Risk Assessment
Risk
Rating
Risk-Mitigation Measures
financial system.
proper financial management in the financial
sector. A number of initiatives have been taken
by Bangladesh Bank to ensure good financial
management with particular focus on the
accountability and transparency of management
in the financial sector. The legislative framework
related to the financial industry has been revised
with a view toward helping improve governance
and strengthening discipline in the financial
system. Automation of the financial sector was a
major step for the central bank in ensuring
financial discipline. Bangladesh Bank has
introduced the Integrated Supervision System
and the Foreign Exchange Monitoring
Dashboard. In addition, the Integrated Export
Monitoring System has put in place with the
National Board of Revenue to intensify financial
sector supervision.

However, governance is an issue needing
continuous scrutiny and is addressed regularly
and whenever required.

Increasing outstanding loan
levels due to coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
Bangladesh Bank ensured ample liquidity to the
banking sector, implemented temporary
moratorium on payments and strengthened
monitoring of the banking sector.
Overall Inherent Risk


Control Risks
1. Internal Controls
Although Bangladesh Bank‘s risk
management systems have
improved over the last few
years, they are still evolving.
Bangladesh Bank issued various risk
management guidelines (Credit/AML/ Foreign
Exchange/IT/Environmental & Social) for all
banks which are at implementation stage.
2. Funds Flow
Fund flows are transparent.
Asian Development Bank (ADB)
would disburse directly to
Bangladesh Bank‘s account
which would, in turn, disburse
directly to the participating
financing institutions‘ (PFIs‘)
accounts.
For use of ADB‘s share of eligible expenditure,
Bangladesh Bank will open a dollar advance
account under terms and conditions acceptable
to ADB. No specific concerns for funds flow were
observed in previous ADB funded projects
implemented by Bangladesh Bank.
3. Accounting and
Financial
Reporting
According to Financial Reporting
Act 2015 all Public Interest Entity
(PIE) should follow International
Accounting Standards (IAS) and
International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS) for accounting
and financial reporting. For
existing projects, subprojects are
required to report quarterly on
contractual expenditures and
provide annual audited financial
reports.
Banks and PFI‘s are not fully complied with
IAS/IFRS. A multi regulatory task force team is
in formation stage to implement IAS/IFRS for
Bangladesh Bank and PFIs.
The accounting policies and procedures of the
project will be governed by the existing
Bangladesh Bank Accounting Policy. All
project-related transactions—i.e., all sources
(ADB and Government of Bangladesh and/or
Bangladesh Bank)—will be accounted for
separately by Bangladesh Bank following
double-entry bookkeeping principles and on a
cash basis. Project expenses will be recorded
in similar manner that are using for other ADB
funded project.
4. Internal Audit
Bangladesh Bank internal audit
function followed risk based
internal audit approach. The risk
criteria based on operational risk,
Bangladesh Bank has a relatively strong
Internal Audit Department, which is fully
independent of executive control. The Head of
Internal Audit reports to the Board Audit

--- Page 30 ---
14



Risk
Risk Assessment
Risk
Rating
Risk-Mitigation Measures
exposure and controls.
Committee, which comprised four independent
members and an adviser, who joins the
meeting on call, as and when required.
Bangladesh Bank‘s Internal Audit Department
carries out audits of projects funded by
development partners such as ADB, Japan
International Cooperation Agency andthe
World Bank at least once in year.
5. External Audit
The external audit of Bangladesh
Bank must be concluded within 6
months by independent audit firm
in accordance with IAS/IFRS.
Controller General of Accounts
conduct annual audit of foreign
aided projects. There is also
project performance audit from
Implementation Monitoring and
Evaluation Division.
The Foreign Aided Projects Audit Directorate
(FAPAD) of the Office of the Controller and
Auditor General will conduct an audit of the
project‘s annual financial statements within 6
months from the end of the fiscal year. The
Project Director will be responsible for audit
follow-up and for taking remedial actions.
Meetings to resolve audit objections must be
held within 3 months of the receipt of the
external audit report from FAPAD. Recent
audits have not identified any material
concerns.
6. Staffing
In general, Bangladesh Bank has
adequate and experienced staff
with previous experience in ADB
projects.
Bangladesh Bank shall ensure that the
required financial management staff will be in
place once the project becomes effective. In
case of staff turnover, Bangladesh Bank will
ensure placement of new staff from
Bangladesh Bank so that financial
management activities continue without
interruption.
7. Management
Information
System (MIS)
Bangladesh Bank will be
responsible for consolidating
financial information, maintaining
supporting papers, and preparing
financial statements. The MIS
Reports willinclude:(i) financial
statements (sources and uses of
funds, uses of funds by project
activity, and the special account
reconciliation statement); (ii) MIS
reports will be submitted to ADB
nolater than 45 days after the
end of each calendar quarter.
Bangladesh Bank will prepare the project‘s
annual statement of utilization of funds
electronically based on extracts of integrated
information system (IIS) data.

Bangladesh Bank needs to develop MIS
system to capture project information and
generate reports that are required to be
submitted to ADB during the project.

8. Capacity of
PFIs
Limited financial management
capacity of PFIs.
Karmasangsthan Bank (KB), the expected PFI
under this project is a specialized bank.
Capacity needs to be developed specially for
ALM and ESMS areas to manage credit
program of this project efficiently, as well as
implementation of core banking system and
hiring of staff at vacant positions. KB is not
familiar with the developing partners reporting
framework. Extensive training will be required
to develop financial management capacity of
KB.
Overall Control Risk

Overall Risk


27.
Bangladesh Bankhas agreed to implement an action plan as key measures to address
the deficiencies.The financial management action plan is provided in Table 7.

Table 7: Financial Management Action Plan for Bangladesh Bank

--- Page 31 ---
15



Risk Area
Agreed Actions
Responsibility
Agreed Timeline
Training of Bangladesh
Bank (Bangladesh Bank)
and participating
financial institution
(PFI)staff on Asian
Development Bank
(ADB) financial
management
requirements
Provide training to Bangladesh Bank project
finance and accounting staff in ADB
disbursement and accounting policies and
procedures
ADB
Within 6 months of
loan effectiveness
Financial reporting
Timely submission of audited statement of
utilization of funds and resolution of audit
findings to be ensured.
Bangladesh
Bank
Within 6 months after
fiscal year end.
Quarterly progress
reports
Submission of quarterly progress reports
with financial progress and disbursement
reports to ADB
Bangladesh
Bank
Within 45 days of end
of each quarter
Monitoring of PFIs
Bangladesh Bank should follow eligibility
criteria for PFIs throughout the project life.

Bangladesh Bank should require PFIs to
follow loan provisioning requirements
against the outstanding loan amounts.
Bangladesh
Bank/PFIs
Throughout project
lifecycle
Information systems
Active use of both ADB systems Loan
Financial Information and Services and
Client Portal for Disbursements to reconcile
project accounts and ADB disbursement
records and keep track of advances,
replenishments, and liquidations to the
advance account on a quarterly basis.
Bangladesh
Bank/PFIs
By loan effectiveness
of the project and
continue throughout
project life.
Sources: Asian Development Bank and Bangladesh Bank.

28.
Financial performance assessment was conducted for the four potential PFIs. Three of
those—BRAC Bank, IDLC Finance Limited, and Bank Asia were the PFIs in ADB programs
including the Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Development Projectand Second Small and
Medium-Sized Enterprise Development Project;and have solid record in executing these
programs. Institutional assessment of PFIs will be carried out by Bangladesh Bank before
formal selection to ensure that the PFIs have capacity to account, report, and audit these funds.

29.
Karmasangsthan Bank is the only PFI that (i) has not participated in any ADB program
and (ii) is a non-scheduled bank. Despite of its good operational and financial performance and
its leading role in supporting financial inclusion, the FMA has revealed certain areas of
improvement and Karmasangsthan Bank has agreed take needed steps to strengthen its
financial management.

Table 8: Financial Management Action Plan for Karmasangsthan Bank
Risk Area
Agreed Actions
Responsibility
Agreed Timeline
Implementation of core
banking system
Implementation of CBS in all branches of
KB with live data entries and processing.

Integration of accounting software with its
core banking system and update of
accounting manual.
KB
December 2022
Risk management
policies and procedures
Develop, obtain Board/Bangladesh Bank
approvals, and implement the following
policies and procedures:
Anti-Money Laundering Policy
Environmental and Social Risk
Management Policy
KB
July 2021

--- Page 32 ---
16



Investment Policy
Enhancements in
internal audit function
Change of reporting line of head of internal
audit to deputy managing director and audit
committee.

Update of internal audit manual.
KB
March 2022
Implementation of IT
policy
Ensure full implementation of IT policy
approved by the board in June 2020.
KB
March 2022
Staff recruitment and
training
KB shall expedite recruitment process to
fulfill the requirement that was designed in
organogram. Following steps will be
undertaken:
Complete hiring of 200 officers
Recruit professional accountant
(CA/CMA/CPA) in GM finance position
KB
31 December 2022

Business plan
Develop comprehensive business plan and
obtain approval of the Board/MOF
KB
June 2022
Project financial
reporting requirements
Submit annual audited statement of
utilization of funds to Bangladesh Bank.

Submit annual audited financial statements
of KB to Bangladesh Bank.

Submit quarterly progress reports to
Bangladesh Bank on the agreed format.
KB
Within 6 months of
end of each FY

Within 1 month of
approval

Within 45 days of end
of each quarter
CA = Chartered Accountant, CBS = core banking solutions, CMA = Certified Management Accountant, CPA =
Certified Public Accountant, FY = fiscal year, GM = General Manager, IT = information technology, KB =
Karmasangsthan Bank, MOF = Ministry of Finance
Sources: Asian Development Bank, Bangladesh Bank, and Karmasangsthan Bank.

Disbursement
Disbursement Arrangements for ADB Funds
30.
The loanproceedswill be disbursed in accordance with ADB‘s Loan Disbursement
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time),7F8and detailed arrangements agreed upon
between the government and ADB. Bangladesh Bank is responsible for collecting and retaining
all relevant documentation and preparing and submission of withdrawal application to ADB.

31.
Advance fund procedure.Separate advance account should be established and
maintained by Bangladesh Bank for ADB funds. The currency of the advance account is the US
dollar. The advance accountis to be used exclusively for ADB‘s share of eligible expenditures.
Bangladesh Bank,who administers the advance account is accountable and responsible for
proper use of advances to the advance account.

32.
The total outstanding advance to the advance accountshould not exceed the estimate of
ADB‘s share of expenditures to be paid through the advance account for the forthcoming 6
months.Bangladesh Bank may request for initial and additional advances to the advance
account based on an Estimate of Expenditure Sheet 8F9 setting out the estimated expenditures to
be financed through the account{s} for the forthcoming 6 months. Supporting documents should
be submitted to ADB or retained by Bangladesh Bank in accordance with ADB‘s Loan

8 ADB. 2017.Loan Disbursement Handbook 2017.Manila.
9 Estimate of Expenditure sheet is available in Appendix 8A of ADB‘s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as
amended from time to time).

--- Page 33 ---
17



Disbursement Handbook(2017, as amended from time to time) when liquidating or replenishing
the advance account.

33.
Statementofexpenditure procedure.9F10 The SOE procedure may be used for
reimbursement of eligible expenditures or liquidation of advances to the advance account.
Supporting documents and records for the expenditures claimed under the SOE should be
maintained and made readily available for review by ADB's disbursement and review missions,
upon ADB's request for submission of supporting documents on a sampling basis, and for
independent audit.

34.
Before the submission of the first withdrawal application, the borrower should submit to
ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person(s) who will sign the withdrawal
applications on behalf of the government, together with the authenticated specimen signatures
of each authorized person.The minimum value per withdrawal application is stipulated in the
Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time). Individual payments
below such amount should be paid (i) by Bangladesh Bankand subsequently claimed to ADB
through reimbursement, or (ii) through the advance fund procedure, unless otherwise accepted
by ADB. The borrower should ensure sufficient loan demands before requesting disbursements.Use
of ADB‘s Client Portal for Disbursementssystem is required for submission of withdrawal
applications to ADB.10F11

35.
The funds repaid by the PFIs will be onlent again to the eligible PFIs following the same
process and requirements during the project implementation period. After the end of the project
period, the fund will be utilized by Bangladesh Bank for future lending to the cottage, micro and
small enterprisesaccording to the terms and conditions laid down in the Subsidiary Loan
Agreement. A special revolving funds account will be established for this purpose
withinBangladesh Bank.

Accounting
36.
Bangladesh Bankwill maintain, or cause to be maintained, separate books and records
by funding source for all expenditures incurred on the project following accounting and financial
management procedures acceptable to ADB.

37.
The PFIs will also maintain separate books and accounts relating to all subloans
financed out of ADB‘s loan proceeds relating to this project. The statement of utilization of funds
will be prepared using appropriate accounting principles and reporting framework.

38.
Based on the statement of utilization of funds by each PFI, Bangladesh Bank shall
prepare a consolidated set of project financial statements, i.e., a consolidated statement of
utilization of funds for all PFIs, indicating the consolidated sources and uses of funds under the
project.

Auditing and Public Disclosure
39.
MOF–FD and Bangladesh Bankwill cause the detailed consolidated statement of

10 SOE forms are available in Appendix 7B and 7D of ADB‘s Loan Disbursement Handbook (2017, as amended
fromtime to time).
11The CPD facilitates online submission of WA to ADB, resulting in faster disbursement. The forms to be completed
by the Borrower are available online at https://www.adb.org/documents/client-portal-disbursements-guide

--- Page 34 ---
18



utilization of the funds, to be audited in accordance with international standards on auditing and
with the Government's audit regulations by Foreign Aided Projects Audit Directorate (FAPAD).
The audited consolidated statement of utilization of funds, together with the auditor‘s opinion will
be presented in the English language to ADB within 6 months from the end of the fiscal year by
Bangladesh Bank.

40.
Bangladesh Bank and each of the PFI shall (i) maintain, separate accounts and records
for the Project; (ii) prepare an annual statement of utilization of funds (indicating sources of
funds and disbursements to PFIs/MSMEs) in accordance with accounting principles acceptable
to ADB; (iii) have the statements referred to in subsection (iv) audited annually by Foreign Aided
Projects Audit Directorate (FAPAD); (v) as part of each such audit, the respective auditors will
prepare a report, which includes the auditors‘ opinions on the statements referred to in
subsection and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the
deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if
any); and (vi) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the close of the fiscal year to which
they relate, copies of such audited statements, audit reports and management letters, all in the
English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request. Bangladesh Bank shall ensure that
the PFIs address in a timely manner key audit issues raised by the auditors as part of the audits
carried out on their annual statements of utilization of funds, and Bangladesh Bank shall inform
ADB on a quarterly basis on the progress being made by PFIs in addressing such audit issues.

41.
Bangladesh Bank will also cause its entity-level financial statements to be audited in
accordance with international standards on auditing and with the Government's audit
regulations by an independent auditor. The audited entity-level financial statements, together
with the auditors‘ report and management letter, will be submitted in the English language to
ADB within 1 month after their approval by the competent authority.

42.
Compliance with financial reporting and auditing requirements will be monitored by
review missions and during normal program supervision, and followed up regularly with all
concerned, including the external auditor.

43.
The government, MOF-FD, and Bangladesh Bank have been made aware of ADB‘s
approach to delayed submission, and the requirements for satisfactory and acceptable quality of
the audited financial statements. 11F12 ADB reserves the right to require a change in the auditor (in
a manner consistent with the constitution of the borrower), or for additional support to be
provided to the auditor, if the audits required are not conducted in a manner satisfactory to ADB,
or if the audits are substantially delayed. ADB reserves the right to verify the project's financial
accounts to confirm that the share of ADB‘s financing is used in accordance with ADB‘s policies

12 ADB‘s approach and procedures regarding delayed submission of audited statement of utilization of funds and
entity-level financial statements:
When these documents are not received by the due date, ADB will write to the executing agency advising
that (a) the audit documents are overdue; and (b) if they are not received within the next 6 months, requests
for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of advance accounts, processing of
new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters will not be processed.
(ii) When these documentsare not received within 6 months after the due date, ADB will withhold processing of
requests for new contract awards and disbursement such as new replenishment of advance accounts,
processing of new reimbursement, and issuance of new commitment letters. ADB will (a) inform the
executing agency of ADB‘s actions; and (b) advise that the loan may be suspended if the audit documents
are not received within the next 6 months.
(iii) When these documentsare not received within 12 months after the due date, ADB may suspend the loan.

--- Page 35 ---
19



and procedures.

44.
Public disclosure of the consolidated statement of utilization of funds, including the
auditor‘sopinion, will be guided by ADB‘s Access to Information Policy (2018). 12F13 After the
review, ADB will disclose theseno later than 14 days of ADB‘s confirmation of their acceptability
by posting them on ADB‘s website. The management letter, additional auditor‘s opinions, and
audited entity financial statements will not be disclosed.13F14

VI.
PROCUREMENT AND CONSULTING SERVICES
Advance Contracting and Retroactive Financing
45.
There will be no advance contracting nor retroactive financing under the project.

Procurement of Goods, Works, and Consulting Services
46.
Procurement and consulting services to be financed by the proposed attached TA by
following ADB Procurement Policy (2017, as amended from time to time) and Procurement
Regulations for ADB Borrowers (2017, as amended from time to time).

47.
The attached TA of $900,000 from ADB‘s Corporate Pool for COVID-19 will help
Bangladesh Bank to strengthen the banking sector‘s support for employment creation. The TA
will also aim to strengthen PFIs and potential PFIs that are important for supporting employment
creation, through institutional capacity development and promotion of best practices in CMSE
banking. The TA will require a total of 10 person-months inputs from 2 international experts and
58 person-months inputs from 9 national experts. ADB will recruit a firm for two international
consultants and nine national consultants using the quality- and cost-based selection method
with a quality–cost ratio of 90:10 because of the highly-specialized expertise needed.The terms
of reference for the consultants are in Appendix 2 of the TA.

VII.
SAFEGUARDS
48.
In accordance with ADB Safeguards Policy Statement (2009), the project is classified as
FI treated as C for impacts on the environment, involuntary resettlement, and indigenous
peoples. The project is expected to have minimal environmental impact as the subloans to
CMSEs will be mainly for light manufacturing, trade, and service sectors. Similarly, the subloans
will be for activities that will not trigger any involuntary resettlements nor have any adverse
impact on indigenous people.

49.
To ensure that all subloans are compliant with ADB requirements, Bangladesh Bank has
developed screening checklists for environmental, involuntary resettlement and indigenous
people impact, which will be used by PFIs to screen each subloan. Bangladesh Bank will
conduct review and confirmation of these documents and provide monitoring, annual reporting,
and grievance redressing mechanisms. ADB will ensure that the subproject screening checklist
is operational in accordance with ADB requirements before any disbursement of funds from the
ADB loan account is made. To ensure that subprojects are properly screened and categorized,

13 ADB. 2018. Access to Information Policy. Manila.
14 This type of information would generally fall under public communications policy exceptions to disclosure. ADB.
2011. Public Communications Policy. Paragraph 97(iv) and/or 97(v).

--- Page 36 ---
20



ADBthrough a TA, will provide capacity building workshops to PFI staff. Each PFI will be
required to designate at least one staff member to be responsible for implementation of its
subproject screening checklist.

50.
ADB shall review and monitor compliance with the environmental and social safeguard
requirements of the project. In relation to this, Bangladesh Bank will assign a staff who will be
trained to develop and monitor the subproject screening mechanism and checklist to ensure that
ADB‘s safeguard requirements will be adhered to. The assigned staff from Bangladesh Bank
will, in turn, train staff from each of the PFIs in implementing and monitoring the screening
mechanism through the screening checklist. Each PFI will provide its status of compliance with
ADB‘s safeguard requirements through an annual monitoring report, which Bangladesh Bank
will compile to provide to ADB.

51.
Prohibited investment activities. Pursuant to ADB‘s Safeguard Policy Statement
(2009),ADB funds may not be applied to the activities described on the ADB Prohibited
Investment Activities List set forth at Appendix 5 of the Safeguard Policy Statement (2009). All
financial institutions will ensure that their investments are in compliance with applicable national
laws and regulations and will apply the prohibited investment activities list (Appendix 5) to
subprojects financed by ADB.

VIII.
GENDER AND SOCIAL DIMENSIONS

52.
Potential gender and social impacts were reviewed. A gender assessment is reflected in
the project documents and is an integral part of the project design which is categorized
thematically as effective gender mainstreaming. The program addresses women‘s
empowerment by narrowing gender disparities through access to financial resources and
opportunities. The project targets aminimum of 20% for women entrepreneurs which will
promote qualified women entrepreneurs by ensuring access to finance. Furthermore, the
associated TA subproject will build women entrepreneurs‘ capacity to access finance resources.

53.
A gender action plan(GAP) for this project has been developed (Table 8). Its
implementation will be monitored regularly and ADB will receive an update on the GAP
implementation at least semiannually.A gender specialist (8 person-months, intermittent) will be
engaged to support the implementation and monitoring and reporting on the GAP.

Table 8:Gender Action Plan
Activities

Indicators &Targets

Responsibility
Time
Output 1: Financial support to enterprises started or operated by migrants, rural enterprises,
and youth from the formal banking sector increased.
1.1 Support 30,000 returning
migrants, unemployed
youth, and rural micro
enterprise owners with
financing
1.1.1 20% women supported with
financing (June 2020 baseline:
500)
Bangladesh
Bank
By June
2025
1.2 Enhance financial
utilization skills of returning
migrants, unemployed
youth, and rural micro
enterprise owners
1.2.1 Needs assessment conducted
covering present job market
and skills for both local and
foreign employment
opportunities for identified
groups.
1.2.2 20% women who received
financial support reported to
TA Consultants
By June
2025
TA Consultants
By June
2025

--- Page 37 ---
21



Activities

Indicators &Targets

Responsibility
Time
have increased entrepreneurial
skills.
Output 2: Capacity of employment-supporting financial institutions strengthened.
2.1 Support at least two
financial institutions in the
enhancement of policy
framework, and risk
management area
(including gender
responsive corporate
strategy, credit guidelines,
risk management, and
anti-money laundering
policies).
2.1.1 Gender-responsive corporate
strategy to support targeted
(unemployed youth, returning
migrants, and rural
entrepreneurs) population with
gender action plan developed
and submitted to Bangladesh
Bank boarda
2.1.2 Incorporate gender-responsive
features in credit guidelines and
risk management policiesb
Bangladesh
Bank, TA
Consultants
By
December
2023
2.2 Raise awareness in best
practices in supporting
cottage, micro enterprises
for at least 100 staff of
PFIsenterprises
2.2.1 40% women staff report
increased knowledge on best
practices in supporting cottage,
microenterprises.
Bangladesh
Bank, TA
Consultants
By June
2025
2.3 Build the capacity of the
implementing agency on
governance, risk
management and financial
management capacities.
2.3.1 At least 80% of all available
and relevant women staff of
two PFIs received capacity
building training on
governance, risk
management, and financial
management capacities
Bangladesh
Bank, TA
Consultants
By June
2025
Output 3: Action plan for promoting formal banking sector support for cottage, micro, and
smallenterprises developed.
3.1 Develop a gender-
responsive action plan for
enhancing access to finance
through banking sector.
3.1.1
A gender-responsive action
plan (with enhanced credit
guarantee schemes to
broaden and strengthen
reach to women micro
entrepreneurs) developed
and submitted to Bangladesh
Bank for approval.c
Bangladesh
Bank/ADB
By
December
2024

3.2 Enhance knowledge on
accessing financial
services for at least 400
returning migrants
3.2.1
At least 150 women report
increased knowledge
Bangladesh
Bank/ADB/PFI
By
December
2024
3.3 Establish an internet-
based training platform for
small enterprises
3.3.1. A user-friendly internet-based
training platform developed
with sex-disaggregated
information
Bangladesh
Bank/ADB
By
December
2024
3.4 Provide incubation services
to women entrepreneurs.
3.4.1
At least 200 women micro
entrepreneurs supported
Bangladesh
Bank/ADB
By
December
2024
PFI = participating financial institution, TA = technical assistance.
a Includes but is not limited to (i) assessment of barriers in banking to ensure women‘s rights to financial services
and ensure that banks are financing sectors where the majority of women work; (ii) review of financial products to
identify appropriate products that economically empower women; (iii) review and establish sex-disaggregated
management information system for evaluation of financial services for women; and (iv) document select
innovations in processes, mechanisms, and products for vulnerability reduction (e.g. pensions and insurance) and
for women‘s economic empowerment.

--- Page 38 ---
22



b Includes but is not limited to guidelines that consider women‘s specific needs for loans and lack of collateral and
has affirmative actions to ensure women receive loans. Risk management policies will be gender-responsive
through assessments to ensure women‘s specific risks are accounted for.
c This plan will include activities to remove barriers in banking to ensure women‘s access to financial services and
ensure that banks are financing sectors and providing financial products where the majority of women work. It will
also include specific interventions to establish sex-disaggregated management information system for evaluation of
financial services for women; and document select innovations in processes, mechanisms, and products for
vulnerability reduction (e.g., pensions, insurance) and for women‘s economic empowerment.

IX.
PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING, AND
COMMUNICATION
Project Design and Monitoring Framework
Impact(s) the Project is Aligned with
Rapid recovery from COVID-19 to restore employment, income and economic activities (Eighth Five-Year Plan, July
2020–June 2025)a

Results Chain
Performance Indicators
Data Sources and
Reporting Mechanisms
Risks and Critical
Assumptions
Outcome



Adverse economic effects
of COVID-19 on migrants,
youth, and rural
entrepreneurs mitigated

By December 2025, at least 45,000
employment opportunities created
among the beneficiaries of the
program. (2020 baseline: 0)
Business registry or
project report using
sample-based survey
R: Further
economic
downturn beyond
projected levels
exacerbates
effective
operations of
banks and/or
operations of the
beneficiaries.
Outputs



Financial support to
enterprises started or
operated by
migrants, rural
enterprises, and
youth for self-
employment from the
formal banking
sector increased
1a. By June 2025, $150 million credit
line to PFIs to expand financing to
unemployed youth, returning
migrants, and rural entrepreneurs
provided (2020 baseline:0)

1a-1b.Executing agency
report, project periodical
monitoring report, bank‘s
annual report.
A: Banks‘ capacity
to meet the
demand for
managing the
increased lending
volume remains
adequate.

1b. By June 2025, 30,000
returning migrants, unemployed
youth, and rural micro and small
business owners (20% women)
supported with financing (June
2020 baseline: 8.4%)

2. Capacity of
employment-
supporting financial
institutions
strengthened
2a. By December 2023, at least two
financial institutions are supported
in enhancing their gender-
responsive corporate strategy,
credit guidelines, risk
management, and anti-money
laundering policies. (2021
baseline: 0)

2a.–2b. TA reports,
executing agency final
report, bank letter
confirmation of the
policy actions taken





2b. By December 2023, at least 100
PFI staff (40% female) have
increased awareness of best
practices in supporting cottage,
micro, andenterprises. (2021
baseline: 0)

--- Page 39 ---
23



Results Chain
Performance Indicators
Data Sources and
Reporting Mechanisms
Risks and Critical
Assumptions
3. Action plan for
promoting formal
banking sector support
for cottage, micro, and
smallenterprises
developed
3a. By December 2024, a gender-
responsive action plan for
enhancing access to finance
through the banking sector
developed by Bangladesh Bank
(2021 baseline: not developed)


3a-3d. TA reports and
final report


3b. By December 2024, at least 400
returning migrants (including at
least 150 women) with increased
knowledge in accessing financial
services. (2021 baseline: 0)




3c. By December 2023, internet-based
training platform for cottage,
micro, and small enterprises is
established (2021 baseline: not
applicable)




3d. By December 2024, at least 200
women entrepreneurs are
supported by incubation services
(2021 baseline: 0)



Key Activities with Milestones
Financial support to enterprises started or operated by migrants, rural enterprises, and youth from the
formal banking sector increased.
1.1 Disburse $40 million through Bangladesh Bank to PFIs by Q4 2022
1.2 Disburse an additional $50 million by Q4 2023
1.3 Disburse an additional $50 million by Q4 2024
1.4 Disburse additional $10 million by Q2 2025
Capacity of employment-supporting financial institutions strengthened.
2.1 Consultants support the PFIs and prospective PFIsto enhance the financial inclusive strategies by Q4 2022
2.2 Consultants support the PFIs and prospective PFIs to enhance the policy frameworks by Q4 2022
2.3 Consultants support the PFIs and prospective PFIs to develop guidelines for credit department and various
committees by Q4 2022
2.4 PFIs take steps to improve underwriting standard to improve quality of the loan portfolio by Q4 2023
2.5 Consultants support the development of procurement plan for the MIS by Q2 2023
2.6 Capacity building activities for PMU and PFI officials on underwriting standards, risk management, GESI
mainstreaming and environmental and social safeguards by Q4 2023
3. Action plan for promoting formal banking sector support for cottage, micro and smallenterprises
developed
3.1 Action plan developed and discussed with Bangladesh Bank, the MOF, and related agencies by Q3 2023.
3.2 Training and knowledge event conducted for PMU, PFIs, and stakeholders to promote best practices by Q3 2023.
3.3 Online platform developed to make training materials available to broader audiences by Q1 2023.
3.4 Outreach conducted, including online, to increase awareness of the program by Q1 2025.
Project Management Activities
Conduct regular project review missions in coordination with ADB‘s Bangladesh Resident Mission.
Monitor banks‘ financial and operational reports and consultant reports.
Conduct a survey of the project outcome.
Inputs
ADB: $150 million (loan)
Technical Assistance Special Fund—other sources: $900,000 (TA)
A = assumption, ADB = Asian Development Bank, COVID-19 = coronavirus disease, GESI = gender equity and
social Inclusion, MIS = management information system, MOF = Ministry of Finance, OP = operational priority, PFI
= participating financial institution, Q = quarter, R = risk, TA = technical assistance.

--- Page 40 ---
24



a Government of the People‘s Republic of Bangladesh, Bangladesh Planning Commission. 2020. Eighth Five-Year
Plan, July 2020–June 2025: Promoting Prosperity and Fostering Inclusiveness. Dhaka.

Monitoring
54.
Project performance monitoring.To ensure that the project is efficiently managed
andits benefits are maximized, Bangladesh Bank will ensure that a project performance
management system (PPMS) satisfactory to ADB is established and implemented. The key
performance indicators and assumptions in the design and monitoring framework will be the
basis for the system. Bangladesh Bank will have established the baseline for each of these
indicators, and such information will be made available to review missions and to the
Government for future impact assessment surveys. The scope of the system, quantity and
quality of data, and frequency of collection will be guided by the need for feedback on
implementation. Bangladesh Bank will submit annual monitoring and evaluation reports to ADB
for the duration of the project. The PPMS will monitor and evaluate the project information and
data to ensure that planned interventions achieve the desired result under each project
component, including key impact and outcome indicators and associated assumptions with
corresponding target dates. PPMS activities will be conducted periodically to gather information
from multiple sources to determine whether the input deliveries for implementing project
activities have rendered expected benefits to the intended beneficiaries. The PPMS will aim to
detect any deficiencies and discrepancies between the plan and the execution of the project in
using the resources efficiently so that timely corrections can be made to adjust the design of the
project and thus improve its benefits, outcomes, and impact. The PFIs will undertake periodic
subproject performance reviews to evaluate the scope, implementation arrangement, and
progress and achievements of objectives of the project.

55.
Compliance monitoring.PFIs‘ compliance with the covenants will be monitored by
Bangladesh Bankbased on the PFIs' monthly reports, annual financial statements, and audited
project account. PFIs will be required to prepare and submit an annual report to Bangladesh
Bank to confirm compliance with the stated requirements.

56.
Safeguards monitoring.Bangladesh Bank will monitor the screening process carried
out by the PFIs as part of the fund application process. ADB will receive annual reports on
safeguard compliances.

57.
Gender and socialdimensions monitoring.GAP implementation status will be reported
semiannually. PFIs‘ monthly report will have data pertaining to the social status and will be sex
disaggregated.

Evaluation
58.
To ensure responsive and timely implementation, there will be regular review missions in
accordance with the project implementation schedule. There will be regular interaction between
the executing agency, Bangladesh Bank, and ADB. Annual performance review will be
conducted by the government, Bangladesh Bank, and ADB. In addition, a comprehensive
midterm review will be undertaken by the government, Bangladesh Bank, and ADB about 24
months after the project‘s effectiveness that will (i) evaluate the scope, design, and
implementation arrangements; (ii) assess implementation performance against project
indicators; (iii) review and establish compliance with loan covenants; and (iv) identify problems
and constraints and, if necessary, recommend changes in the design or implementation
arrangements.

--- Page 41 ---
25




59.
Within 6 months after the loan closing date, the MOF-FD and Bangladesh Bank will
submit a project completion report to ADB in a form acceptable to ADB. Subsequently, ADB will
field a mission to finalize the project completion report.

Reporting
60.
Bangladesh Bankwill provide ADB with (i) quarterly progress reports in a
formatconsistent with ADB's project performance reporting system; (ii) consolidated annual
reports including (a) progress achieved by output as measured through the indicator's
performance targets, (b) key implementation issues and solutions, (c) updated procurement
plan, and (d) updated implementation plan for the next 12 months; and (iii) a project completion
report within 6 months of physical completion of the project. To ensure that projects will continue
to be both viable and sustainable, project accounts and the executing agency audited financial
statement together with the associated auditor's report, should be adequately reviewed.

Stakeholder Communication Strategy
61.
ADB will communicate the information about this project and the outcome of this project
through its publications, presentations and on its website. ADB will also communicate with the
project‗s internal stakeholders (MOF-FD and Bangladesh Bank) through written documents and
official meetings, including SC meetings. Subborrowers would provide information at the time of
subloan application and would have personal follow-up interactions with the PFIs. PFIs would
communicate with Bangladesh Bankon the status of financial intermediary loans through
submission of quarterly progress reports to the PMU at Bangladesh Bank, who, in turn, will
forward the same to ADB. PFIs will also communicate to their staff through training programs,
sensitization programs, and workshops to subborrowers through public campaigns. Internet
based outreach and training will be piloted in this program.

62.
The key communication objectives of the project are:

to inform potential and existing entrepreneurs and in particular women
entrepreneurs of the opportunities that the project offers including capacity
building activities and increased access to credit resources;
(ii)
to empower potential borrowers and women entrepreneurs and encourage them
to enter into business ventures;
(iii)
to gather feedbacks on the project implementation and identify areas of
improvement;
(iv)
to strengthen official network for cottage, micro and small enterprises and create
a learning environment through sharing of experiences among the PFIs; and
to create public support for the project.

ANTICORRUPTION POLICY
63.
ADB reserves the right to investigate, directly or through its agents, any violations of the
Anticorruption Policy relating to the project.14F15 All contracts financed by ADB shall include
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the
executing agency and all project contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service

15 Anticorruption Policy: https://www.adb.org/documents/anticorruption-policy.

--- Page 42 ---
26



providers. Individuals and/or entities on ADB‘s anticorruption debarment list are ineligible to
participate in ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the project.15F16

64.
To support these efforts, relevant provisions are included in the loan agreement of the
project.

65.
ADB‘s Office of Anticorruption and Integrity is the point of contact to report allegations of
fraud and corruption among ADB-financed projects or its staff. 16F17 Anyone coming across
evidence of corruption associated with the project may contact below by telephone, facsimile, e-
mail, or by mail:

Office of Anticorruption and Integrity
Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila, Philippines
Telephone: +63 2 632 5004
Fax: +63 2 636 2152
E-mail: integrity@adb.org or anticorruption@adb.org

XI.
ACCOUNTABILITY MECHANISM
66.
People who are, or may in the future be, adversely affected by the project may submit
complaints to ADB‘s Accountability Mechanism. The Accountability Mechanism provides an
independent forum and process whereby people adversely affected by ADB-assisted projects
can voice, and seek a resolution of their problems, as well as report alleged violations of ADB‘s
operational policies and procedures. Before submitting a complaint to the Accountability
Mechanism, affected people should make an effort in good faithto solve their problems by
working with the concerned ADB operations department. Only after doing that, and if they are
still dissatisfied, should they approach the Accountability Mechanism.F18

XII.
RECORD OF CHANGES TO THE PROJECT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL
67.
This document is subject to revisions based on changing conditions on the ground, and
all changes will be initiated by the government request and approved by ADB. All revisions
and/or updates during the course of implementation should be retained in this section to provide
a chronological history of changesto implemented arrangements recorded in the PAM, including
revision to contract awards and disbursement s-curves.


Date
PAM approved by ADB

First Revision






16 ADB's Office of Anticorruption and Integrity website: https://www.adb.org/integrity.
17 ADB's Integrity Office website is available at http://www.adb.org/integrity/unit.asp.
18 Accountability Mechanism. http://www.adb.org/Accountability-Mechanism/default.asp.

--- Page 43 ---
Appendix 1
27



ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MONITORING REPORT

Scope of Participating Financial Institutions’ Environmental Monitoring of
Subborrowers

Environmental monitoring will be based on information gathered relating to
environmental impacts and risks during the lifetime of a transaction and supplemented with site
visit, if needed. Monitoring is needed to ensure subborrowers‘ compliance with applicable
national laws and regulations, with ADB safeguard requirements and legal agreements.
Monitoring of subborrowers should focus on the following main aspects:

The subborrowers‘ ongoing compliance with applicable national laws and
regulations and with ADB‘s safeguard-related requirements in Safeguard Policy
Statement;

(ii)
The subborrowers‘ compliance with conditions included in the ADB loan
agreement with Bangladesh Bank;

(iii)
Regulatory trends (e.g., changing environmental laws and regulations) may
introduce new standards which cannot easily be met by the subborrower, thus
exposing both parties (bank and subborrower) to new sources of risk and liability;
and

(iv)
Subborrowers continuing to pay significant fines for ongoing environmental
violation and non-compliance and for which the PFI‘s assistance may be needed
to help the subborrower achieve compliance. Although fines may appear as
minor operating costs, they may signal future major liabilities.

Periodic reports on the environmental and social performance of subloans should be
brief and focus on the following:

The nature of subloans made (size, purpose, term), vulnerability of location, and
environment and social safeguards categories;
(ii)
Any major environmental and/or social-related accidents or incidents;
(iii)
Any litigation, complaints, or fines for non-compliance with environmental or
social or health and safety regulations brought to the PFI‘s attention or otherwise
known to the PFI; and
(iv)
Any non-compliance with ADB‘s prohibited investment activities list.

List of Approved CMSE Subloan
Subproject/
company
name
Location
(ideally to
include land
use or
surrounding
environmental
feature)
Sector/
subsector
Nature
of
business
activity
Subloan
amount
Purpose
of
subloan
Term of
Subloan
Category
EN/IR/IP
Compliant with
applicable
national laws
and
regulation(Y/N)
Compliant
with PIAL*
(Y/N)
Remarks
EN = environment, IP = indigenous people, IR = involuntary resettlement, PIAL = prohibited investment activity list.
Note: This information will be captured through the project performance management system.

Source: Asian Development Bank.

--- Page 44 ---
28
Appendix 1



Scope of Bangladesh Bank’s Environmental Monitoring of PFIs

Bangladesh Bank‘s monitoring of PFIs will focus on the following:

Appointment of trained staff to implement the safeguards screening checklist;
(ii)
Appropriate implementation of safeguards screening checklist for subprojects;
(iii)
Compliance with relevant selection criteria for qualified subprojects as stipulated
in the loan agreement between ADB and Bangladesh Bank;
(iv)
Bad subloans resulting from environmental and social problems;
Environmental opportunities or effects associated with subloans;
(vi)
Subloans rejected on environmental, social, health, and safety grounds;
(vii)
Operationalization of environmental and social safeguards management system,
and availability of qualified staff;
(viii)
Management of environmental risks consistent with the Environmental Risk
Management Guidelines for Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh
issued by Bangladesh Bank in 2011 or its update; and
(ix)
Difficulties and constraints related to the implementation of the safeguard
screening checklist or environmental safeguards management system.

Scope of ADB monitoring of Bangladesh Bank

Review and approve subproject safeguard screening checklist in consultation
with ADB prior to loan disbursement to any PFI;
(ii)
Training of PFI staff on the use of subproject safeguard screening checklist and
monitoring of subborrowers;
(iii)
Compliance with relevant PFI selection criteria;
(iv)
Compliance with safeguard-related provision on conditions for disbursement to
each PFI; and
Compliance with other relevant loan covenants.

Scope of Monitoring Report of Bangladesh Bank to ADB

Bangladesh Bank‘s annual monitoring report to ADB will cover points outlined in sections
A, B, and C
above.

--- Page 45 ---
Appendix 2
29



PARTICIPATING FINANCIAL INSTITUTION SELECTION CRITERIA

Prior to declaring a financial institution eligible for inclusion in the project as a
participating financial institution (PFI), Bangladesh Bank as the implementing agency will
evaluate each candidate financial institution based on the criteria defined in this document. ADB
will assess all potential PFIs to ensure that the eligibility criteria for PFIs as defined in OM D6
have been met.1 ADB will further assess the PFI‘s financial soundness as evidenced by
adequate capital, asset quality, liquidity, and profitability. ADB concurrence is required prior to
declaring each PFI as eligible for inclusion in the project as a PFI. Moreover, all PFIs should
continue to meet the eligibility criteria for the duration of project implementation. ADB reserves
the right to disallow disbursements from the credit facility to any PFI not conforming with any of
the above criteria until such time as the PFI is able to satisfy the PFI eligibility criteria.

Each private sector scheduled bank or FI can avail funds from the program up to
equivalent of 20% of its shareholder equity, unless with the explicit agreement of Bangladesh
Bank and ADB.

The PFIs must comply with the following eligibility criteria:

Cottage, micro, small lending commitment and capacity of PFIs. Each PFI must
have a track record of performance on lending to the relevant sector;
(ii)
Compliance with applicable prudential regulations and guidelines of Bangladesh
Bank. Each PFI must follow all applicable prudential regulations and guidelines of
Bangladesh Bank;
(iii)
Minimum CAMELS rating. Each PFI must have a minimum rating of 2 or better
on the CAMELS-based assessment carried out by Bangladesh Bank. Each PFI
must at least maintain its CAMEL rating throughout the life of the project, unless
it‘s a target bank 19F2 for which MOF has provided a guarantee in favor of
Bangladesh Bank 20F3
(iv)
The non-performing loan ratio lower than 10% (footnote 18)unless it‘s a target
bank for which MOF has provided a guarantee in favor of Bangladesh Bank;21F4
and
commitment to disburse $3 million each year under the project.

Provisions will be included in each participation agreement between Bangladesh Bank
and a PFI that require the PFI to (i) maintain financial soundness; (ii) conduct its operations in
accordance with sound financial principles and practices; (iii) maintain a lending and investment
policy acceptable to ADB and Bangladesh Bank to enable it to effectively appraise the financial,
technical, environmental, and economic feasibility of investment projects; and (iv) supervise and
monitor the implementation of investment projects by beneficiaries. ADB reserves the right to
disallow disbursements from the credit facility to any PFI not conforming with any of the above
criteria until such time as the PFI is able to satisfy the criteria. Such PFI shall be required to

1ADB. 2003. Bank Policy Financial Intermediation Loans. Operations Manual. OM D6. Manila.
2Target bank means a state-owned bank or financial institution owned by the government, or a bank or financial
institution established under a special act or regulation, with the objective of employment creation for youth,
returning migrants or rural entrepreneurs.
3For banks established by the government with the objective of employment creation among the youth, returning
migrants, and rural entrepreneurs, MOF may provide guarantee on the repayment of the loans to Bangladesh Bank
in lieu of meeting this criterion.
4 Non-performing loan ratio is the ratio of gross non-performing loan over all outstanding loan amount.

--- Page 46 ---
30
Appendix 2



remedy any default of eligibility criteria within 6 months of default and in any event, within the
disbursement period of the Employment Project.

Each PFI must comply with the environmental and social safeguards management
arrangement of the project in form of a subproject screening checklist designed to identify,
remedy, and monitor subprojects‘ compliance according to ADB‘s Safeguard Policy Statement
(2009).

--- Page 47 ---
Appendix 3
31



SUBLOAN AND SUBBORROWER CRITERIA

Participating financial institutions (PFIs) will comply with the following requirements in
selecting eligible subborrowers:

Subborrower must be economically and financially viable and presented
reasonable business plans;
(ii)
Subborrowers may not be related parties of the PFI‘s board or senior
management;
(iii)
Subborrowers must be (a) operated by returning migrants (returned since the
beginning of 2020) or families of migrants, or (b) operated by youth with training
(18–45 years old), or (c) located outside Dhaka and Chattogram metropolitan
areas;
(iv)
Subborrowers must contribute 20% of the equity in their business;
Subborrowers must not have default history; and
(vi)
Subborrowers must meet other credit requirements of the PFIs.

Subborrowers must belong to the cottage and micro enterprise as defined by
Bangladesh Bank. Small enterprises as defined by Bangladesh Bank andlocated outside of
Dhaka and Chattogram metropolitan area22Fthat are also affected by COVID-19 pandemic23F1 will
also qualify. Maximum subloan size is Tk 5 million. With a tenor of less than 5 years. Subloans
can be used for the purpose of working capital or long-term investment.

PFIs will ensure that the subloans are for financing subprojects with no significant
environmental, involuntary resettlement or indigenous peoples impacts under ADB‘s Safeguard
Policy Statement (2009), i.e., only category C subloans are permitted in this project.

The interest rate for the subloan shall reflects funding cost of the PFIs and the credit risk
of the subborrowers and shall be determined by Bangladesh Bank, agreeable to ADB.4F2

In addition to the above criteria, PFIs must adhere to other requirements as specified in
the loan agreement and the project agreement.



1PFIs will determine Covid-19 affected small entrepreneurs by using their banking experience and prudence.
2 ADB project officer‘s written concurrence will be needed.

--- Page 48 ---
32
Appendix 4



QUARTERLY/ANNUAL MONITORING REPORT
as of Q1 2022

Bangladesh: Supporting Post-COVID-19 Small-Scale Employment Creation Project
Loan Agreement No: [xxxx]


Introduction and Basic Data:

ADB Loan Number:
Xxxx
Project Title:
Supporting Post-COVID-19 Small-Scale Employment Creation Project
Loan Allocations:
ADB ($million):150

Important dates:
Dates of Approval (dd-mm-yyyy):
Date of Signing (dd-mm-yyyy):
Date of Effectiveness (dd-mm-yyyy):
Executing Agency:

Implementing Agency:

Original Loan Closing Date:
30 June 2025
Revised Loan Closing Date:
N/A

Disbursement
Quarterly Disbursement Progress
(BDT million with two decimal points)
Quarters
ADB Fund
Government/Bangladesh
Bank
PFIs
Sub-
Borrowers’
Equity
Total
Target:





Quarter 1, Year 1





Quarter 2, Year 1





Quarter 3, Year 1





Quarter 4, Year 1










Total Target





Actual:





Quarter 1, Year 1

PFIs = participating financial institutions.

Discussion on Deviations and Remedial Measures
Reasons for deviation:
Any reasons for deviations of actual and
target disbursements will be discussed in
detail.
Remedial measures for addressing deviations:
The actions that would be taken to address the
deviations should be discussed here.

--- Page 49 ---
Appendix 4
33



Subloan Analysis

Parameters
Year 1
(YTD)
Year 2
(YTD)
Year 3
(YTD)
Year 4
(YTD)
Year 5
(YTD)
Total
Type of Loan: Number






Working Capital Loan (=< 1 year)






Loan for Capital Investment
(1–5 years)













Type of Loan: BDT million






Working Capital Loan (=< 1 year)






Loan for Capital Investment
(1–5 years)













Maturity Analysis: Number






Short Term Loan (=< 1 year)






Medium Term Loan (1–3 years)






Long Term Loan (3–5 years)













Maturity Analysis: (BDT million)






Short Term Loan






Medium Term Loan






Long Term Loan













Subloans by PFI: (number)






Banks






FIs













Subloans by PFI: (BDT million)






Banks






FIs




















Gender Analysis: (number)






Male-owned






Female-owned













Gender: (BDT million)






Male-owned






Female-owned













Business Classification:(number)






Manufacturing






Service






Trade













Business Classification:
(BDT million)






Manufacturing






Service






Trade













Type of SME:(BDT million)a






Cottage

--- Page 50 ---
34
Appendix 4



Parameters
Year 1
(YTD)
Year 2
(YTD)
Year 3
(YTD)
Year 4
(YTD)
Year 5
(YTD)
Total
Micro






Small













Type of SME:(Number)






Cottage






Micro






Small













Employment: (Headcount)






Employment before Refinancing






Additional employment created













Subloan Type: (Number)






First Time Borrower






Old Borrower













Loan Performance: (BDT million)
Data
Not
Available



Unclassified






Overdue






Special Mention






Bad Loss













Loan Performance: (Number)b






Unclassified






Overdue






Special Mention






Bad Loss













Environmental
category:
(Number)






Red






Orange






Green













Subloan Size: (Number)






<BDT 500,000






BDT 500,000 - BDT 2,000,000






BDT 2,000,000 - BDT 5,000,000













Subloan Size: (BDT)






<BDT 500,000






BDT 500,000 - BDT 2,000,000






BDT 2,000,000 - BDT 5,000,000













aAs per definition of the Government/Ministry of Industries/Bangladesh Bank.
bAs per Bangladesh Bank Guideline.

--- Page 51 ---
Appendix 4
35



Compliance with Covenants

Key Operational Covenants
Parameters
Target
Actual
(Cumulative
BDT million)
Comments with reasons for any
deviation and remedial action

















Compliance with Loan Agreement
Covenants will be inputted as stipulated in Loan Agreements
(Article IV–Particular Covenants, Schedule 3–Execution of Project; Financial Matters)
Covenants
Reference in
Loan
Agreement
Timeline
Complied / Being Complied with / Not
Complied
Reasons for non-compliance and
remedial action taken or to be taken





















Compliance with Project Agreement
Covenants will be inputted as stipulated in Project Agreement
(Article IV–Particular Covenants)
Covenants
Reference in
Project
Agreement
Timeline
Complied / Being Complied with / Not
Complied.
Reasons for non-compliance and
remedial action taken or to be taken





















Compliance with Audit Report of Foreign-Aided Project Audit Directorate (FAPAD)
FY
FAPAD Observations
Response from the Implementing
Agency and timeline for resolution
2021–2022




2022–2023

--- Page 52 ---
36
Appendix 4



Progress with Parameters of Design and Monitoring Framework (DMF)

Performance Indicators with Targets and Baselines
Achievement to date with
data source and projection of
compliance by timeline; Any
reason for not achieving the
target.


Output 1:




Output 2:



Output 3:




Continuing Eligibility of PFIs

Name of PFIs
Bank/NBFI
Qualified or
not
Reasons if not qualified

















Discussion on performance of PFIs: Provide a discussion on PFIs, who are the lowest
performers in terms of disbursement, interest rate and non-performing assets, and the action
plan for improving their performance.

Attachment: Annual report of Participating Financial Institution

Summary of participating financial institutions (PFIs): Apart from individual analysis, the
implementing agency will also provide every year a summary of all PFIs as part of compliance
of continuing eligibility criteria.

Project Issues and Problems

Describe major Issues related to the project and its
implementation
Describe the remedial actions taken or
to be taken to address each issue
Design Issues:

Readiness Issues:

Implementation Issues:

Compliance Issues:

Other Issues:


Attachments:

Annual Report of PFIs (yearly submission)
(ii)
Audit Report of Foreign Aided project Audit Directorate (yearly submission)
(iii)
Continuing Eligibility Report of PFIs (yearly submission)
(iv)
Minutes of meeting of Project Steering Committee
Environmental and social safeguard report

--- Page 53 ---
Appendix 4
37



(vi)
Excel file:The implementing agency will provide a softcopy of excel of PFI-wise
data containing columns of the following parameters:
Vulnerable group tagging;
Gender of the borrower;
Tenors;
Geographic location in terms of districts and divisions;
Type of financial institutions, such as bank and non-banking financial
institutions;
Interest rate;
Broad sector classification, such as, trade, service and industry;
Type of enterprise (cottage, micro, and small)
Ownership by type of gender–male and female;
Employment generation;
Loan performance as per Bangladesh Bank guidelines;
Type of subloans– unemployment youth, returnee migrant and rural
enterprise;
First time loan by sub-borrower / repeat sub borrower of the project
Type of project–new or expansion
Collateral–none, land and buildings, stocks and book debts, guarantees
etc.
Type of loan–working capital and fixed investment in land and buildings or
machinery
Export-orientation–export-oriented or domestic consumption
Environmental category

--- Page 54 ---
38
Appendix 5



SEMI-ANNUAL GENDER ACTION MONITORING REPORT

Targets
Indicators
Activities
Responsibilities
Status

--- Page 55 ---
Attachment-2


Environmental and Social Management
System Arrangement






Supporting Post COVID-19 Small Scale
Employment Creation Project (SPCSSECP)
Project Number: 54336-001
October 2021
(RRP BAN 54336)

--- Page 56 ---
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of 30August 2021)

Currency unit
taka (Tk)
Tk1.00
$0.0117
$1.00
Tk85.1799


ABBREVIATIONS

ADB
Asian DevelopmentBank

EIA
environmental impact assessment

EMP
environmental managementplan

ESMS
Environmental and Social Management System

IEE
Initial EnvironmentalExamination

PIAL
Prohibited Investment Activities List

SPS
Safeguards PolicyStatement


NOTE{S}
The fiscal year (FY) of the Government ofBangladeshand its agenciesends on30
June. “FY” before a calendar year denotes the year in which the fiscal year ends,
e.g., FY2021ends on30 June 2021.
(ii)
In this report, "$" refers to United States dollars.


This environmental and social management system arrangement is a document of the borrower.
The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent those of ADB's Board of Directors,
Management, or staff; and may be preliminary in nature.

In preparing any country program or strategy, financing any project, or by making any
designation of or reference to a particular territory or geographic area in this document, the
Asian Development Bank does not intend to make any judgments as to the legal or other status
of any territory orarea.

--- Page 57 ---
Introduction

The Asian Development Bank (ADB) will provide a sovereignloan to the People‟s
Republic of Bangladesh to onlend to Bangladesh Bank. The loan would be relent by
Bangladesh Bankthrough the eligible participating financial institutions (PFIs) to on lend to
trained youth, returning migrants, and rural entrepreneurs to engage in self-employment
business activities or micro, and small-sized enterprises. Within ADB, it is categorized as a
financial intermediary loan.

The Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) Arrangement was prepared
by theBangladesh Bank for managing environmental and social risks of the subloans to be
supported under the “Supporting Post-COVID-19 Small-Scale Employment Creation”
project.The ESMS has complied the requirement of ADB Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS)
2009 and Bangladesh Bank‟s Guidelines on Environmental and Social Risk Management
(ESRM) for Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh. The ESRM was approvedby the
Bangladesh Bank Board of Directors and disclosed in February 2017.

The subloans under this project will be supporting business activities in cottage and
micro enterprises which will be unlikely to have significant environmental and social safeguard
impacts. This project is classified as FI-C for environment, involuntary settlement and
Indigenous Peoples0F1 in line with the Safeguard Policy Statement (SPS) 2009 of ADB. To ensure
all the subloans are compliant with ADB and Bangladesh Bankrequirements, Bangladesh Bank
has developed screening checklists for environmental,involuntary resettlement and Indigenous
People impact, which will be used by PFIs to screen each subloan. Bangladesh Bank will
conduct review and confirmationof these documents and provide monitoring, semiannual
reporting and grievance redressing mechanisms.

Applicable Domestic Legal Framework

Environmental regulations. Bangladesh has an environmental legal framework that is
conducive to both environmental protection and natural resources conservation. In addition, a
wide range of laws and regulations related to environmental issues are in place in Bangladesh.
Many of these are cross-sectoral and partially related to environmental issues. Table 1 presents
a summary of relevant environmental regulations.

Table 1: Relevant Environmental Regulations and Policies
Regulation
Brief Description
National Environmental Policy,
1992
Approved in May 1992, this policy provides for the basic framework for
environmental action together with a set of broad sectoral action
guidelines. Key elements include (i) maintenance of ecological balance
and overall progress and development through protection and
improvement of the environment, (ii) protection against natural
disasters, (iii) identification and regulation of all types of activities that
pollute and degrade the environment, (iv) ensuring sustainable use of
allnatural resources, and (v) active association with all environmentally
related international initiatives.


1Also known as tribes, minor races, ethnic sects and communities in the context of Bangladesh.

--- Page 58 ---
Regulation
Brief Description
Bangladesh Environmental
Conservation Act, 1995 (as
amended by Act Nos 12 of
2000 and 9 of 2002)

This Act provides for conservation of the environment, improvement of
environmental standards and control and mitigation of environmental
pollution.
Environment Conservation
Rues (ECR) of 1997 (adopted
under the provision of ECA
1995 and amended in
February and August 2002,
2005, February 2010, and
February 2017)

This Act provides rules related to the declaration of ecologically critical
areas, obtaining environmental clearance certificate (ECC),
environmental quality standards, acceptable limits for discharges of
waste, and environmental guidelines on pollution prevention.
National Disaster Management
Act 2012
This Act provides for establishment of a framework for managing
disasters in a comprehensive way.

Environment Court Act 2000
(amended in 2002 and 2010)
Under the Judiciary and Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate
Change (MOEFCC), this Act ensures the resolution of disputes on
environmental and social damages resulting from any development
activities. This also allows for the completion of environment-related
legal proceedings effectively.

0BNational Forest Policy 1977
(amended in 1994)
This policy is designed to conserve the existing forest areas, bring
about 20% of the country's land area under the Forestation
Programme, and increase reserve forests by 10% per year to 2015
through coordinated efforts of Government of Bangladesh and
nongovernment organizations, and through active participation of the
people.

Wetland Protection Act 2000
The law provides for the protection of water bodies of the cities,
divisional and district towns, and municipalities. The water bodies in
the rural areas are outside the jurisdiction of this Act. However, the Act
does not have any provision that prohibits construction of any kind of
permanent or temporary structure within a determined distance of the
water bodies.

Natural Water Bodies
Protection Act 2000
According to this Act, the character of water bodies (i.e., rivers, canals,
tanks, or floodplains identified as water bodies in the master plans or in
the master plans formulated under the laws establishing the
municipalities in division and district towns) shall not be changed
without approval of the concerned ministry. This Act is under the
Rajdhani UnnayanKartipakkha/Town Development
Authority/Municipalities.

Bangladesh Water Act 2013
This Act makes provisions for integrated development, management,
abstraction, distribution, use, protection, and conservation of water
resources.

National Safe Drinking Water
Supply and Sanitation Policy of
1998

Ensures access to safe water and sanitation services at an affordable
cost

--- Page 59 ---
Regulation
Brief Description
Infectious Diseases
(Prevention, Control and
Elimination) Act 2008
This Act provides to “keep or quarantine any suspected person
infected with an infectious disease, at a specific hospital, temporary
hospital, establishment or home”. This law empowers government in
notification, isolation, quarantine, sample collection and testing in
emerging diseases.

Medical Waste Management
Rules 2008
Any solid, liquid, gaseous, and radioactive waste material generated
during the diagnosis, treatment, preventive, and curative measure, or
in research activities pertaining to disease diagnosis when it is
released, discharged, or disposed causing detrimental effect on human
health and environment is considered medical waste

Public Health (Emergency
Provisions) Ordinance, 1994
Calls for special provisions in case of emergency to prevent the spread
of human disease, safeguarding public health and providing them
adequate medical service and other services essential to the health of
respective community and workers in particular during the construction
related work.

Environment Court Act 2000
(amended in 2002 and 2010)
This Act ensures the resolution of disputes on environmental and
social damages resulting from any development activities. This also
allows for the completion of environment-related legal proceedings
effectively.
Bangladesh Labour Act 2006,
Bangladesh Labor Act 2013,
Factory Rule 1979
These regulations aim to protect the interests and rights of the workers,
through provision of comfortable working environment, reasonable
working conditions, and to ensure workers‟ safety. This also provides
for the prohibition of employment of children and adolescent.

Bangladesh Labour Rules
2015
The rules state compliance procedure to engage manpower and
obtaining approval of the Manpower Policy. The Rules prescribe the
process and forms for the registration of manpower supply agencies
under the Labour Act and use of certain forms for various register such
as service book, labour register, leave register, etc.
Bangladesh National Building
Code 2006
The Code sets minimum standards for design, construction, quality of
materials, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of all
buildings to safeguard, within achievable limits, life, limb, health,
property, and public welfare.
Bangladesh Building
Construction Rules 2008

These rules aim to control development by imposing conditions on
setbacks, site coverage, construction of garages, access to plot,
provision of lift, land use of that particular plot and height of building. It
regulates technical details of building construction and maintains
standards of building construction.
Bangladesh Factory Act 2006

The Act requires every workplace including small- or large-scale
construction where women are employed to have an arrangement of
childcare services. Based on this Act and Labor Laws - medical
facilities, first aid and accident and emergency arrangements are to be
provided by the authority to the workers at workplaces.

--- Page 60 ---
Regulation
Brief Description
Local Government
(Pourashava) Act 2009 and the
Local Government (City
Corporation) Act 2009

Provides guidance for integrated community and workers health and
hygiene at the construction, and operation and maintenance stages of
the project.


Land acquisition and resettlement. Articles 42 and 47 of the Bangladesh Constitution
1972 set forth the basic principles of property compensation while the Land Acquisition Act
1894, and the Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable Property Ordinance (ARIPO) 1982
(amended in 1994, 1995, and 2004) are regulations being enforced by the Revenue
Department. However, ARIPO 1982 has been revised and the current policy framework for land
acquisition and resettlement will now be based on the Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable
Property Act of 2017.

Indigenous Peoples. The protection of the fundamental rights of all citizens, which
include Indigenous Peoples, is provided for in Articles 11, 19, and 28 of the 1972 Constitution.
Specifically, Articles 23–24 set forth the protection of the cultural tradition of Indigenous
peoples. The Chhoto Nagpur Tenancy Act of 1908 allows for (i) individual ownership of lands to
ethnic communities, whereby the transfer of tribal land to non-tribal people without the
permission of the Deputy Commissioner would be illegal; (ii) free to profess and practice their
religions and develop their own culture; and (iii) “Adivasi” right to protect their own land. 1F2

Bangladesh Bank’s ESRM Guideline

With a view of integrating sustainability into overall credit management of banks and FIs,
Bangladesh Bank issued the Guidelines on Environmental and Social Risk Management
(ESRM) in 2011 which has been the pioneering initiative from any central bank or financial
sector regulator. The latest update has been made to ESRM in February 2017 2F3. In parallel to
the DOE assigned four color coded environmental categories, the Bangladesh Bank‟s ESRM
also proposed to assign financial intermediary as a risk category to those transactions involving
clients such as banks, microfinance institutions, private equity funds, and leasing and insurance
companies, which act as financial intermediaries in making financing available to other clients.
The Bangladesh Bank‟s ESRM proposed 3 categories: (a) High - transactions typically involve
clients with business activities with significant adverse environmental and social impacts that
are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. A potential impact is considered sensitive if it may be
irreversible (such as loss of a major natural habitat), affect vulnerable groups or ethnic
minorities, involve involuntary displacement and resettlement, or affect significant cultural
heritage sites; (b) Medium - transactions typically involve clients with business activities with
specific environmental and social impacts that are few in number, generally site-specific, largely
reversible and readily addressed through mitigation measures and international best practice.
Potential adverse environmental impacts on human populations or environmentally important
areas are less adverse than those of High-risk transactions; and (c) Low - Transactions typically
involve clients with business activities with minimal or no adverse E&S impacts.




2 Adivasis is Bangladesh‟s minority tribal group.
3 https://www.bb.org.bd/aboutus/regulationguideline/esrm_guideline_feb2017.pdf

--- Page 61 ---
Safeguard Requirements of the ADB

Environment categorization of the ADB. According to Safeguard Requirements 1 of
the SPS, a subproject‟s environment category is determined by the category of its most
environmentally sensitive component, including direct, indirect, induced, and cumulative
impacts. Each proposed subproject is scrutinized as to its type, location, scale, sensitivity and
magnitude of its potential environmental impacts.

A proposed subproject is assigned one of the following categories depending on the
significance of potential environmental impacts and risks:
Category A. A proposed subproject is classified as category A if it is likely to
have significant adverse environmental impacts that are irreversible, diverse, or
unprecedented. These impacts may affect an area larger than the sites or
facilities subject to physical works. A subproject in this category is not allowed
under this project;
(ii)
Category B. A proposed subproject is classified as category B if its potential
adverse environmental impacts are less adverse than those of category A
subprojects. These impacts are site-specific, few if any of them are irreversible,
and in most cases mitigation measures can be designed more readily than for
category A subprojects. An initial environmental examination (IEE), including an
environmental management plan (EMP), is required. A subproject in this
category is not allowed under this project; and
(iii)
Category C. A proposed subproject is classified as category C if it is likely to
have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. An environmental impact
assessment or IEE is not required, although environmental implications are
reviewed and subproject specific environment management plan is framed, as
necessary.

10.
Involuntary resettlement categorization. According to Safeguard Requirements 2 of
the SPS, a subproject is assigned one of the following categories depending on the significance
of the probable involuntary resettlement impacts:
Category A. A proposed subproject is classified as category A if it is likely to
have significant involuntary resettlement impacts. A subproject in this category is
not allowed under this project;
(ii)
Category B. A proposed subproject is classified as category B if it includes
involuntary resettlement impacts that are not deemed significant. A subproject in
this category is not allowed under this project; and
(iii)
Category C. A proposed subproject is classified as category C if it has no
involuntary resettlement impacts. No further action is required.

11.
Indigenous Peoples categorization. According to Safeguard Requirements 3 of the
ADB Safeguard Policy Statement (2009), a proposed subproject is assigned to one of the
following categories depending on the significance of the potential impacts on Indigenous
Peoples:
Category A. A proposed subproject is classified as category A if it is likely to
have significant impacts on Indigenous Peoples. A subproject in this category is
not allowed under this project.
(ii)
Category B. A proposed subproject is classified as category B if it is likely to
have limited impacts on Indigenous Peoples. A subproject in this category is not
allowed under this project.

--- Page 62 ---
(iii)
Category C. A proposed subproject is classified as category C if it is not
expected to have impacts on Indigenous Peoples. No further action is required.

Applicable Environmental and Social Requirements for the Project

12.
As the project‟s implementing agency, Bangladesh Bank will make sure that PFIs carry
out proper due diligence for selection of subloans for financing. PFIs will conduct environmental
and social screening using the guidelines provided in the ESMS to comply with the
requirements of Bangladesh Bank, national laws and regulations, and ADBSPS. All
subloans/subprojects are reviewed and evaluated against the ESMS, national laws, regulations
and standards on environment, health, safety, involuntary resettlement and land acquisition,
Indigenous Peoples, and physical cultural resources. The guidance for selection of subloans are
as follows:
Subloans/subprojects will be screened against ADB‟s Prohibited Investment
Activities List (PIAL) (see Appendix 1);
(ii)
subprojects belonging to prohibited or discouraged List of Activities of
Bangladesh will not be eligible.
(iii)
all subprojects that passed criteria (i)–(ii) will need to fill in the (a) environmental
screening checklists; (b) involuntary resettlement screening checklist; and (c)
indigenous peoples screening checklist (Appendix 4) for further screening of their
nature, scale, and siting to determine possible adverse social impacts and thus,
the category and eligibility of the subloans will be determined based on their
environmental and social categorization and the criteria set in Table 2.

13.
This ESMS will be communicated to all relevant staff and operational employees of
Bangladesh Bank, PFIs and loan recipients (subborrowers) forcompliance.

14.
Overall, ADB‟s safeguard selection criteria for subloans under ADB project is
summarized in Table 2 below.

Table 2: Summary of Safeguard Requirements
Category
(Risk Rating)
Environmental
Assessment
Involuntary
Resettlement
Indigenous Peoples
Category A
(with potential significant
impacts)
Ineligible for project financing
Category B
(with less significant impacts)
Category C
(with minimal or no impacts for
environmental; and no impact
for involuntary resettlement
and Indigenous Peoples)
Comply with national laws, ESMS, and ADB‟s PIAL
ADB = Asian Development Bank, PIAL = Prohibited Investment Activities List.

Implementation Arrangements

15.
The Ministry of Finance, acting through its Economic Relations Division is the executing
agency while the Finance Division is the financial management agency, and Bangladesh Bank
is the implementing agency. A project management unit (PMU) will be established by
Bangladesh Bank to monitor the screening and selection of subprojects/subloans and the day-
to-day implementation ofthe project. Bangladesh Bank has developed environmental and social
screening guidelines for the PFIs, which were agreed by ADB. PFIs will screen all subprojects

--- Page 63 ---
based on the screening checklist to exclude all subprojects with category A and category B
impacts on the environment, involuntary resettlement, and tribes, minor races, ethnic sects and
communities; and finance only subprojects that are classified category C. Training will be
provided for Bangladesh Bank and PFI staff on safeguards. Bangladesh Bank will assign
experienced staff to oversee safeguard implementation.The annual safeguards monitoring
reports are to be submitted to ADB by Bangladesh Bank PMU.

COVID-19 Health and Safety Guidance

16.
Considering community transmission of COVID-19 in Bangladesh, all selected PFIs and
subloan beneficiaries will follow the guidance and protocols of Bangladesh and ADB (see
Appendix 5). ADB has shared the guidance notes with its executing and implementing agencies
in the DMCs. Bangladesh government has also issued a technical instruction in June 2020 for
reopening the businesses and activities. All PFIs and subborrowers are required to follow the
instructions provided by Bangladesh government and ADB.

Compliance Monitoring and Reporting

17.
Bangladesh Bankwill ensure that screening checklists, associated permits, any
grievance redress- related documents are systematically recorded. These documents will be
made available during ADB review missions. ADB will conduct periodic review missions which
may include review of screening checklists and site visits to sample subprojects to ensure that
only the eligible subprojects are financed through the ADB loan. 3F4As a precautionary measure,
Bangladesh Bankwill submit to ADB anannual environmental and social safeguard monitoring
report (Appendix6).

Grievance Redress Mechanism

18.
Bangladesh Bank‟sFinancial Integrity and Customer Service Department (FICSD)is the
existing channel for Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The GRM will provide a systematic,
transparent, and timely process for receiving, evaluating, and addressing affected people‟s
subproject-related complaints and grievances. The GRM will be open to all subproject affected
people, regardless of the nature of their complaint using an understandable and
transparentprocessthatisgenderresponsive,culturallyappropriate,andreadilyaccessibletoall
segments of the affected people at no costs and withoutretribution.

19.
A complaint may be registered by stakeholders who may be directly or indirectly affected
by the subloan. An affected person may opt to remain anonymous. A representative may
register on behalf of the affected person or group provided that the representative is identified
by the affected person or group and submits evidenceoftheauthoritytoactontheirbehalf.A
complaint can be submitted through written application, by e-mail or personal appearance at
any branch office and/or Head Office of PFIs. Any unresolved issues may be forwarded to the
Head Office of Bangladesh Bank.

20.
Complainant may file grievances through the following channels:
Level 1. The complainant files a grievance against a subproject to branch office
of PFIs.Thebranchofficeisrequiredtoresolvecomplaintsagainsttheclient within 10
working days of receipt of the complaint. The office will receive, acknowledge

4Missions will be conducted virtually until such time that it is allowed by national government and ADB.

--- Page 64 ---
and record all complaints received (including contact details of the complainant,
date the complaint was received, nature of grievance), take actions or decisions
to address the grievance, and provide feedback to the complainant, via writing
(so that a record ismaintained).
(ii)
Level 2. If the complainant is not satisfied with the action taken or if the
branchoffice of PFIsisnotabletoresolvethegrievancewithin10workingdays,it will be
forwarded to the head office of PFIs, where the case will be reviewed, further
information and clarification will be sought from the branch office if necessary. A
feedback will be provided to the complainant within 10 working days, and the
action will bedocumented.
(iii)
Level 3. If the head office of PFIs not able to resolve the case within 10 working
days, it will be forwarded to the head office of Bangladesh Bank, wherein the
same process will be followed, and the grievance will be addressed within 10
workingdays.Intotal ifthecaseneeds to beresolvedwithin 30 working days.

21.
The GRM can run parallel to legal redress. Complainant may resort to the country‟s legal
system at any stage.

22.
Accountability mechanism. In the event that the complainant is not satisfied with the
GRM process, the complainant may resort to ADB‟s Accountability Mechanism at any stage.
Before submitting a complaint to the Accountability Mechanism, it is recommended that affected
people make a good faith effort to resolve their issues by working with the ADB Resident
Mission operations department. Only after doing that, and if they are still dissatisfied, they could
approach the AccountabilityMechanism.

Organizational Responsibilities, Resources and Capacity

23.
Bangladesh Bankhasextensive prior experience in implementing the ESMS for ADB and
other development agencies. Through a TA under the project, an environmental and social
safeguard
specialist
(consultant)
will
be
hired
to
supplement
Bangladesh
BanktoimplementtheESMSandfurther developsafeguardcapacity in Bangladesh Bank and
PFIs.The environmental and social safeguards specialist (consultant) will develop a training
program on environmental and social safeguards. Using Bangladesh Bank funds, the consultant
will provide training to staff of Bangladesh Bank(head office, regional offices) and PFI
safeguards focals to implement theESMS.

--- Page 65 ---
Appendix 1



ADB PROHIBITED INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES LIST

The following do not qualify for Asian Development FI financing:
production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labor 4F1 or child
labor;5F2
(ii)
production of or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country laws
or regulations or international conventions and agreements or subject to international
phaseouts or bans, such as (a) pharmaceuticals, 6F3 pesticides, and herbicides,7F4 (b)
ozone-depleting substances,8F5 (c) polychlorinated biphenyls9F6 and other hazardous
chemicals,10F7 (d) wildlife or wildlife products regulated under the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, 11F8 and (e)
transboundary trade in waste or waste products;12F9
(iii)
production of or trade in weapons and munitions, including paramilitary materials;
(iv)
production of or trade in alcoholic beverages, excluding beer and wine; 13F10
production of or trade in tobacco;10
(vi)
gambling, casinos, and equivalent enterprises;10
(vii)
production of or trade in radioactive materials, 14F11 including nuclear reactors and
components thereof;
(viii)
production of, trade in, or use of unbonded asbestos fibers; 15F12
(ix)
commercial logging operations or the purchase of logging equipment for use in primary
tropical moist forests or old-growth forests; and
marine and coastal fishing practices, such as large-scale pelagic drift net fishing and fine
mesh net fishing, harmful to vulnerable and protected species in large numbers and
damaging to marine biodiversity and habitats.

1 Forced labor means all work or services not voluntarily performed, that is, extracted from individuals under threat of
force or penalty.
2 Child labor means the employment of children whose age is below the host country‟s statutory minimum age of
employment or employment of children in contravention of International Labor Organization Convention No. 138
“Minimum Age Convention” (www.ilo.org).
3 A list of pharmaceutical products subject to phaseouts or bans is available at http://www.who.int.
4 A list of pesticides and herbicides subject to phaseouts or bans is available at http://www.pic.int.
5 A list of the chemical compounds that react with and deplete stratospheric ozone resulting in the widely publicized
ozone holes is listed in the Montreal Protocol, together with target reduction and phaseout dates. Information is
available at http://www.unep.org/ozone/montreal.shtml.
6 A group of highly toxic chemicals, polychlorinated biphenyls are likely to be found in oil-filled electrical
transformers, capacitors, and switchgear dating from 1950 to 1985.
7 A list of hazardous chemicals is available at http://www.pic.int.
8 A list is available at http://www.cites.org.
9 As defined by the Basel Convention; see http://www.basel.int.
10 This does not apply to project sponsors who are not substantially involved in these activities. Not substantially
involved means that the activity concerned is ancillary to a project sponsor's primary operations.
11 This does not apply to the purchase of medical equipment, quality control (measurement) equipment, and any
equipment for which ADB considers the radioactive source to be trivial and adequately shielded.
12 This does not apply to the purchase and use of bonded asbestos cement sheeting where the asbestos content is
less than 20%.

--- Page 66 ---
10
Appendix 2




ENVIRONMENT SCREENING CHECKLIST

Please check if the proposed subproject was checked against PIA: Yes/No

Date of Screening (D/M/Y):………/………../…………..…

Section A: Basic information

Sub-borrower‟s Name:
Location: ……………………………………………………………………………………………………
Amount of loan requested: ………………………………….

Name of the
Enterprise/Employment
Description Size/Volume/Production Capacity of Enterprise






1. Main product(s):Briefly describe the name of ultimate product, etc.


2. Main production process(es): (Provide simple flowchart to show main input of
materials, water, energy (heat, steam or fuels etc.), output of intermediate and final
products, and wastes (gaseous,liquid or solid) etc.


3. Production capacity: (per year and/or per day; if not applicable, need to explain here)

Section B:Checklist for Environmental Screening
Sl.
General Intervention Issues
Yes No N/A

Remarks
1. Possible common environmental issues in Enterprises




1.01
Is the subproject located within or adjacent to any protected
area (reserve forest, rehabilitation camp, Ecologically Critical
Area, heritage area etc.)?




1.02
Will the subproject cause damage to any of the cultural
heritage sites/structures?




1.03
Is there any source of surface water nearby?




1.04
Will the subproject create a barrier from natural runoff?




1.05
Is deep tube-well required for using huge amount of ground
water?




1.06
Is there any possibility of blocking the local drainage system?




1.07
Is there a possibility of polluting the adjacent water body?




1.08
Are there significant sources of air pollution?




1.09
Is there significant noise pollution which may disturb the
community and biodiversity (e.g., birds)?




1.10
Is resettlement of existing inhabitants or temporary occupants
needed?

--- Page 67 ---
Appendix 2
11



1.11
Is there child labor in the work force?




1.12
Are there any complaints from nearby neighbors/sensitive
receptors?




1.13
Is there any Grievance Redress Mechanism in place?




1.14
Is there any arrangement for ensuring of environment and
social safeguards compliance?





2. Issues Related to Agriculture (Crop, Fruit, Vegetable, Spices production)


2.01
Are the agricultural products safe for humans and harmless to
the environment?




2.02
Is the enterprise responsible for introducing invasive plant
species?




2.03
Will the invasive plant species be harmful for native species?




2.04
Are the pesticides and herbicides included in the banned list in
http:\\www.pic.int?




2.05
Is there any post harvesting agro-product storage place?




2.06
Is there any significant quantity of bi-product from harvesting?




2.07
Is the bi-product useful for the poultry and livestock as fodder?




2.08
Are residuals used as bio-fertilizer?




3. Issues related to Livestock and Poultry

3.01
Is there enough source of food/fodder and medicine?




3.02
Is there any source of fresh water?




3.03
Is there proper ventilation?




3.04
Is the place dry, clean and healthy for the livestock?




3.05
Is there any scope for waste management?




3.06
Will the shade belong a waste management facility (if the
answer of 3.05 is „no‟)?




3.07
Is the shade vulnerable to spread disease by runoff and water
contamination?




3.08
Is there a possibility of degrading the quality of adjacent water
bodies by run-off/seepage/leakage/spillage?




4. Issues Related to Fisheries

4.01
Will there be civil works which may affect the quality of surface
waters?




4.02
Is the dike high enough to protect the pond/ditch from surface
run-off?




4.03
Is there any scope for dike-plantation/grass surfing to prohibit
soil erosion?




4.04
Is there any scope of organic waste management?




4.05
Is there a possibility of accidental oil spills (i.e., from boats)?




5. Issues related to Manufacturing

5.01
Is there proper ventilation in the facility?




5.02
Are there sources noise (i.e., from the equipment)?




5.03
Are there any sources of air pollution (dust, smoke, odor)?




5.04
Is there any water treatment facility (to minimize the
salinity/iron/arsenic in drinking water)?




5.05
Are there alternative water sources (rainwater)?




5.06
Are the workers provided with proper training on emergency
procedures and safety measures?




5.07
Are the workers provided with Personal Protective Equipment
(i.e., masks, safety-belts, gloves, spectacles, air-pluck, helmet,
gumboot, aprons, etc.)?

--- Page 68 ---
12
Appendix 2




5.08
Are the workers provided with sanitary facilities (i.e.? toilet)




5.09
Are solid wastes disposed of properly (biodegradable and
non-biodegradable)?




5.10
Are there any harmful chemicals used in the process?




6. Issues related to Food Processing

6.01
Is the facility located near sensitive receptors? (i.e., hospital,
school, residential area)




6.02
Does the food processing facility have impacts on soil, ground
water and surface water?




6.03
Is wastewater treated?




6.04
Are food ingredients permitted by the proper authorities (e.g.,
colors & chemicals)?




6.05
Is proper hygiene observed by the workers?




6.06
Are the surroundings regularly sanitized?




6.07
Is there any bad odor observed or reported within the facility?




6.08
Are solid wastes disposed of properly (biodegradable and
non-biodegradable)?




6.09
Are the workers provided with Personal Protective Equipment
(i.e., masks, safety-belts, gloves, spectacles, air-pluck, helmet,
gumboot, aprons, etc.)?




6.10
Are the workers provided with proper training on emergency
procedures and safety measures?




6.11
Are there safety signs within the facility?




6.12
Are there any accreditations/certifications related to food
safety?




7. Issues related to Trade & Services

7.01
Is there any landing and storage space for products?




7.02
Is there any harmful chemicals used for storage?




7.03
Are the harmful chemicals labelled and stored properly?




7.04
Are there any sources of air pollution (dust, smoke, odor)?




7.05
Are the packages (plastic, glass, wood, polymers) managed or
disposed of properly?




7.06
Are there any related activities which may cause pollution (i.e.,
solid waste accumulation)?




8. Others : 8.01-Salt cultivation and trade, 8.02-Hospital

8.01
Is there any system that protect salt-leaching?




8.02
Is the hospital managing medical waste properly?




Description (if any):







Environmental Screener of PFI Regional
Office……………………………………………………………………………………

Name
Signature
Date

--- Page 69 ---
Appendix 2
13



PART 3 – To be filled by PFI loan officer
AftercompletingParts1–2,subprojectsthatfalltocategoryCshouldbefurtherscreenedbythelistbelow
aboutitssitingwhichcontributestoitspotentialenvironmental-socialrisksthuscategory.

Sensitive receptors and/or protected areas Include
but are not limited to:
If inside these
areas, please
provide details
If outside, where
and how far from
its boundary?
Critical habitat and natural habitat as defined by ADB
Safeguard Policy Statement, world natural or cultural
heritage sites, officially designated nature reserves, forest
park, geo-park, important wetland, key habitats for wildlife,
reproduction area of protected flora, spawning, feeding,
wintering ground and migrating route for key aquatic life,
estuary, mangrove

Designated basic farmland, basic grassland,
scenic area/park, drinking water source protective zone,
oceanic special protective zones, natural fishery ground,
key zone for water and soil erosion control, closure zone
for desertification etc.

Areas with main function as residential, health and
medical, cultural, educational, research and development,
and offices as well as physical cultural resources/relics,
airports, airfields or militarybases/zones etc.

--- Page 70 ---
14
Appendix 3




INVOLUNTARY RESETTLEMENT SCREENING CHECKLIST


Name of Subborrower:

Name of Enterprise:

Location:


Probable Involuntary Resettlement Effects
Yes
No
Not
Known
Remarks
Involuntary Acquisition of Land

1. Will there be land acquisition?
2. Is the site for land acquisition known?
3. Is the ownership status and current usage of land
to be acquired known?
4. Will easement be utilized within an existing Right
of Way (ROW)?
5. Will there be loss of shelter and residential land
due to land acquisition?
6. Will there be loss of agricultural and other
productive assets due to land acquisition?
7. Will there be losses of crops, trees, and fixed
assets due to land acquisition?
8. Will there be loss of businesses or enterprises due
to land acquisition?
9. Will there be loss of income sources and means of
livelihoods due to land acquisition?
Involuntary restrictions on land use or on access to legally designated parks and protected areas
10. Will people lose access to natural resources,
communal facilities and services?
11. If land use is changed, will it have an adverse
impact on social and economic activities?
12. Will access to land and resources owned
communally or by the state be restricted?
Information on Displaced Persons:
Any estimate of the likely number of persons that will be displaced bythe Project?[] No[ ]Yes
If yes, approximately howmany?

Are any of them poor, female-heads of households, or vulnerable topovertyrisks?[] No[ ]Yes

Are any displaced persons from indigenous or ethnicminoritygroups?[] No[ ]Yes


Note: The project team may attach additional information on the project, as necessary.

--- Page 71 ---
Appendix 3
15



IR Categorization:
 A – significant IR impacts (200 or more); RPrequired
 B – insignificant IR impacts; RPrequired
 C – no impact; norequirement
Prepared by: PFI Loan Officer
NameandSignature:


Designation:

Date:
Reviewed by: PFI Safeguard Officer
NameandSignature:


Designation:

Date:

--- Page 72 ---
16
Appendix 4




INDIGENOUS PEOPLES SCREENING CHECKLIST


Name of Subborrower:

Name of Enterprise:

Location:


KEY CONCERNS
(Please provideelaborations on the Remarks
column)
YES
NO
NOT
KNOWN
Remarks
A. Indigenous Peoples Identification
1. Are there socio-cultural groups present in
or use the project area who may be
considered as "tribes" (hill tribes, schedules
tribes, tribal peoples), "minorities" (ethnic or
national minorities), or "indigenous
communities" in the project area?

2. Are there national or local laws or policies
as well as anthropologicalresearch/studies
that consider these groups present in or
using the project area as belongingto "ethnic
minorities", scheduled tribes, tribal peoples,
national minorities, or cultural communities?
3. Do such groups self-identify as being part
of a distinct social and cultural group?

4. Do such groups maintain collective
attachments todistinct habitats or ancestral
territories and/or to the natural resources in
these habitats and territories?

5. Do such groups maintain cultural, economic,
social,and political institutions distinct from the
dominant society and culture?

6. Do such groups speak a distinct language or
dialect?

7. Has such groups been
historically,socially and economically
marginalized, disempowered, excluded,
and/or discriminated against?

8. Are such groups represented as
"Indigenous Peoples" or as "ethnic minorities"
or "scheduled tribes" or "tribal populations" in
any formal decision-making bodies at the
national or local levels?

--- Page 73 ---
Appendix 4
17



KEY CONCERNS
(Please provideelaborations on the Remarks
column)
YES
NO
NOT
KNOWN
Remarks
B. Identification of Potential Impacts
9. Will the project directly or indirectly benefit or
target Indigenous Peoples?

10. Will the project directly or indirectly affect
Indigenous Peoples' traditional socio-cultural
and belief practices?(e.g., child-rearing, health,
education, arts, and governance)

11. Will the project affect the livelihood systems
of Indigenous Peoples? (e.g., food production
system, natural resource management, crafts
and trade, employment status)

12. Will the project be in an area (land or
territory) occupied, owned, or used by
Indigenous Peoples, and/or claimed as
ancestral domain?

C. Identification of Special Requirements
Will the project activities include?

13. Commercial development of the cultural
resources and knowledge of Indigenous
Peoples?

14. Physical displacement from traditional or
customary lands?

15. Commercial development of natural
resources (such as minerals, hydrocarbons,
forests, water, hunting or fishing grounds)
within customary lands under use that would
impact the livelihoods or the cultural,
ceremonial, spiritual uses that define the
identity and community of Indigenous
Peoples?

16. Establishing legal recognition of rights to
lands and territories that are traditionally
owned or customarily used, occupied or
claimed by indigenous peoples?

17. Acquisition of lands that are traditionally
owned or customarily used, occupied or
claimed by indigenous peoples?


Anticipated project impacts on IndigenousPeoples

Projectcomponent/
activity/ output
Anticipated positive effect
Anticipated negative effect

--- Page 74 ---
18
Appendix 4




1. LIST ALL PROJECT
COMPONENT / ACTIVITY /
OUTPUTS HERE
---- INDICATE EFFECTS TO
IPS OR PUT N/A AS
NECESSARY

Note: The project team may attach additional information on the project, as necessary.

IP Categorization:
 A – significant impacts; IPPrequired
 B – insignificant impacts; IPP required
 C – no impact; norequirement
Prepared by: PFI Loan officer
NameandSignature:


Designation:

Date:

Reviewed by: PFISafeguard Officer
NameandSignature:


Designation:

Date:

--- Page 75 ---
Appendix 5
19



COVID-19 HEALTH AND SAFETY GUIDANCE NOTE (DRAFT)16F1

Objective

This health and safety plan (H&SP) was prepared based on guidance notes from the
WHO, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Canadian Centre for
Occupational Health and Safety, the requirements of the government and the guidance notes
issued by ADB. The H&SP aims to prevent incidence of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in
subproject activities supported by Bangladesh Bank through the ADB-financed Supporting Post-
COVID-19 Small-Scale Employment Creation Project by providing information on its symptoms,
modes of transmission, exposure risk assessment, and precautionary measures following the
hierarchy of controls.

About COVID-19

COVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. COVID-19 is a
disease can infect a person causing illness that can be mild to severe or even fatal. An infected
person may commonly experience mild to moderate symptoms such as fever, cough, tiredness,
and loss of taste or smell while others have no symptoms at all and are referred to as
asymptomatic cases. Symptoms may vary as the disease variants mutate. According to the
CDC, symptoms can appear in as few as 2 days or as long as 14 days after exposure.

Symptoms

The WHO identifies the most common symptoms as fever, cough, and fatigue and loss
of taste or smell while other symptoms that are less common that may affect some patients
include sore throat, headache, aches and pains, diarrhoea, rashes or discoloration of fingers
and toes, and red or irritated eyes. A severe case of COVID-19 has symptoms like difficulty
breathing or shortness of breath, loss of speech or mobility, or confusion, and chest pain.
People with mild symptoms who are healthy are advised to manage symptoms at home while
those with severe symptoms are advised to seek medical attention.

Modes of Transmission

The WHO states that COVID-19 mainly spreads from an infected person to others in
close contact (less than 1 meter) through respiratory droplets (e.g., coughing, sneezing,
laughing, talking, singing). By touching something with the COVID-19 virus on it and then
touching the face (e.g., mouth, nose, eyes) before washing hands. People infected with COVID-
19 can show no symptoms but still spread the disease. According to CDC, although COVID-19
can survive for hours or days on different surfaces, infection from contact with contaminated
surfaces appears to be less common.

Workplace Risk Assessment

The risk of work-related exposure depends on the probability of coming into close
contact (i.e., less than 1 meter) or frequent contact with people who may be infected with
COVID-19, and through contact with contaminated surfaces and objects. WHO describes the
risk levels (Figure 1) that may be useful in carrying out a workplace risk assessment for

1 Contractor will finalize the plan to be approved by the PMU

--- Page 76 ---
20
Appendix 5



exposure risk to COVID-19 and in planning for preventive measures to non-health care
workplaces.17F2

Figure 1: Levels of Risk Exposure to COVID-19


The level of risk in the workplace of each subproject activity should be assessed. The
level of risk is affected by several factors such as person‟s underlying health conditions,
presence of transient workers where original community has or had an outbreak, poor condition
of sanitary facilities, poor housekeeping practices, workers in and out of the local communities,
and lack of reliable health care facilities to respond to any COVID-19 incidence.

The subborowers shall coordinate with the respective local government units in case
positive cases are identified.

Hierarchy of Controls to Reduce Risk

The WHO and the Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (CCOHS) provide
guidance on COVID-19 preventive measures that can be implemented in the workplace.
According to CCOHS, a zero risk for COVID-19 transmission is not possible in any setting, and
as such, the best approach is to always keep the risk exposure as low as possible. Figure 2
shows the hierarchy of controls to reduce risk while Table 1 presents the preventive measures
that can be applied.





2 World Health Organization. 2021. Considerations in implementing and adjusting public health and social measures
in the context of COVID-19: interim Guidance.

--- Page 77 ---
Appendix 5
21




Figure 2: Hierarchy of Controls to Reduce Risk


Preventive Measures

The subborrowers should put in place measures to minimize the chances of spreading
and contain the spread of the virus, ensure their worksites are prepared for an outbreak, and
develop and practice contingency plans so that personnel know what to do if an outbreak occurs
and how treatment will be provided. These preparation measures should be communicated to
its employees.

Table: Preventive Measures to Reduce Risk to COVID-19 Exposure
Controls
Preventive Measures
Characteristics
Prepare detailed profile of the workforce, activities and work schedule,
breakdown of workers (i.e., living at home, those who stay within the local
community, and onsite accommodation); identify measures to minimize
movement in and out of the worksite
Information/awareness
Prepare/print materials on COVID-19 (refer to WHO Bangladesh website,
https://www.who.int/bangladesh/emergencies/coronavirus-disease-(covid-
19)-update.
Place COVID-19 posters and signs in the worksite/office with images and
text in Bengali and English (refer to website of WHO Bangladesh and
DGHS)
Provide updates to workers and staff on COVID-19 risks in the workplace
from sources such as WHO, CDC, and DGHS
Education (briefing and
orientation)
Include safety briefings that cover issues such as safety procedures,
appropriate use of PPEs, occupational health and safety, workers‟ code of
conduct, flexible work hours, etc. to ensure compliance to COVID-19 safety
requirements.
Appoint an occupational health and safety (OHS) officer onsite who will be
the authority to issue directives to maintain health and safety of all workers
and staff.
Briefing to include topics such as: (i) signs and symptoms of COVID-19, (ii)
how it is transmitted, (iii) how to protect oneself (safety protocols), (iv) what
to do if one has the symptoms or others have the symptoms, (v)

--- Page 78 ---
22
Appendix 5



Controls
Preventive Measures
discrimination or prejudice in case a worker becomes positive to COVID-
19, and (vi) site access control system and monitoring.
Communication
Workers and Staff
Information/updates on COVID-19 risks will only come from the OHS officer
(or back-up in case the OHS Officer gets sick) to avoid confusion.
Workers can report to the OHS officer on work situations that are not safe
or healthy.
Workers will be given opportunities to ask questions, raise their concerns,
and make suggestions as they see fit.
Seek assistance from the local government unit in designing appropriate
health and safety measures.
General hygiene requirements will be communicated and monitored by the
OHS officer. This includes: (i) ensure handwashing stations are equipped
with soap, disposable paper towels, and waste bins with cover in key areas
at the worksite (e.g., entry/exit to work areas, toilet, canteen/food
distribution, drinking water station, workers‟ temporary rest area, waste
disposal area, etc.). If hand washing stations with soap and water are not
available, alcohol-based sanitizer (at least 60% alcohol) will be used.
Communicate clearly based on information from WHO or DGHS in a
manner that can be easily understood by workers such as putting of
posters on handwashing, social distancing or on how to protect
themselves.
Access Control
Prohibit entry if employees have symptoms or may have been exposed.
Sign-in devices will be sanitized and contact during sign-in will be
minimized.
Keep a distance of at least 1 meter between persons and avoid direct
physical contact (e.g., shaking hands).
Temperature check using thermal scanner will be mandatory before entry
and at the end of work shift (low-grade fever of 37.3oC or more will not be
allowed entry to the workplace). Anyone who leaves and re-enters within
the work shift will be re-checked.
An area will be designated for staff to wear personal protective equipment
(PPE) such as facial mask and will be disinfected twice a day.
Meetings will be held outdoors with social distancing. If conducted indoors,
number of persons will be limited to maintain social distancing or additional
sessions will be done.
Any person on medication for a specific medical condition that will affect
work performance will not be allowed.
Sanitation
Hand hygiene
Put signs or posters to encourage frequent hand washing with soap and
water for at least 20 seconds.
Ensure availability of adequate hand washing stations (even just a spouted
water container, catch bucket for water, soap, and paper towels) accessible
to workers. If water and soap are not available, alcohol-based hand
sanitizers (with at least 60% alcohol) will be used.
Regular and thorough handwashing: (i) before starting work, (ii) before
eating or drinking, (iii) frequently during the work shift, especially after
contact with co-workers or touching shared items/tools/equipment, (iv) after
going to the washroom, (v) after handling garbage, (vi) after contact with
potentially contaminated objects (gloves, clothing, masks, used tissues,
waste), and (vii) immediately after removing gloves and other PPEs but
before touching eyes, nose, or mouth.
Sharing phones, tools, or equipment will be discouraged unless they can
be disinfected between users.

--- Page 79 ---
Appendix 5
23



Controls
Preventive Measures
Discourage sharing of items such as phones, tablets, tools, or equipment
unless they can be cleaned and disinfected between users.
If possible, assign each worker a unique set of tools for their use only.
Have workers bring their own pre-filled water bottles and food. Food and
water bottles should not be shared.

Respiratory hygiene
Post signage promoting respiratory etiquette in the workplace.
Wear mask or face cover based on the requirements of the government
and will ensure its safe and proper disposal.
Medical facial mask and paper tissues will be made available for those who
may sneeze (or into the bend of the arm) or develop a runny nose at work,
along with no-touch plastic lined garbage bins with lids for hygienic disposal
of used tissues and mask.
A worker who is sick will not be allowed to work and if a worker feels unwell
at work, a medical mask will be provided and will be allowed to get home
safely.

Cleaning, disinfection, and waste disposal
Clean offices, washrooms, lunch/break rooms and other workspaces every
day focusing on commonly touched surfaces such as doorknobs, handrails,
tables, chairs, tools, radios, etc., using soap or neutral detergent. Disinfect
after cleaning to kill pathogens with disinfectants approved by local
authorities such as DGHS.
Regularly clean shared tools, phones, and other devices with alcohol or
disinfectant wipes.
Train cleaning staff on appropriate cleaning procedures and frequency of
high-use areas
Monitor and restock washrooms and workspaces for soap paper towels
and hand sanitizer.
No touch garbage bins will be provided for waste collection in all common
access areas, manage waste as a type of medical waste, and dispose
accordingly.
Physical distancing
Maintain a distance of at least 1 meter between people and avoid direct
physical contact, strict control over external access, queue management.
Limit the number of people allowed in indoor spaces and common areas at
the same time to maintain distance.
Mandatory use of mask if social distancing cannot be followed. Reusable
mask will be cleaned and disinfected after use and will not be shared.
Single use mask will be disposed of in designated covered bins.
Work schedule and
work practices
Identify work that can be done offsite and allow staff to work from home or
remotely where and when possible.
Use technology such as Zoom, Microsoft Team, and other platforms to help
workers while working from home.
Stagger work hours or workdays to reduce the number of workers at one
time on-site or in common spaces like entry, as necessary
Arrange that work breaks are taken in outdoor areas on-site.
Workers returning from an area where there is COVID-19 transmission
should monitor themselves for symptoms for 14 days and take their
temperature twice a day; if they are feeling unwell, they should stay at
home, self-isolate, and contact a medical professional.
Worker who may have
COVID-19 symptoms
Any person showing signs of cough or colds will not be allowed access to
the work site and will be advised to stay home and isolate.

--- Page 80 ---
24
Appendix 5



Controls
Preventive Measures
A contingency plan/protocol will be developed, in consultation with local
authorities, to set out procedures if someone becomes ill at the worksite.
Report if there is stoppage of work due to incidence of sick workers and
staff, or any health and safety concerns at the worksite.
Sources:ADB. 2020. Protecting the Safety and Well-Being of Workers and Communities from COVID-19. Manila;
Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety. 2020. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Tips. and COVID-19:
Workplace Health and Safety Guide; US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. COVID-19 Workplaces and
Business; World Health Organization. Bangladesh. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Update; and World Health
Organization. Considerations for public health and social measures in the workplace in the context of COVID-19.
10 May 2020.

--- Page 81 ---
Appendix 6
25



SUGGESTED SCOPE FOR A SEMI-ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTALAND SOCIAL MONITORING
REPORT

Bangladesh Bankis required to submit the semiannual Environmental and Social Monitoring
Report (ESMR) to ADB. Please include additional sheets or attachments as required to provide
details.

Name of Organization

Completed by (name):

Position in organization:

Date:
Reporting period
From:

To:

Subprojects processed under ADB fund during the reporting period

Name of
Subproject
Sub
/sector
Tenor of
Subloan
(Months)
Subloan
amount
($„000)
Safeguard
Category
Env, IR or IP
issues and
actions
taken
Status
(approve,
revise or
reject)
Reasons
(for revise
or reject)
Env
IR
IP
























































































































Env = environment, IR = involuntary resettlement, IP = Indigenous Peoples.
a Please use the sectors listed in the earlier table or any standard classification


Subprojects Supported Using ADB Funds

More information about all subprojects approved during this reporting period.

Name of Subborrower and subproject:


Subproject location:


Industry/ sector:


Value of exposure (US$ million):

--- Page 82 ---
26
Appendix 6



Any E&S due diligence by your
organization? If yes, is it desk review
of safeguard documents, and/or field
visit, and by whom and when?


Any environmental assessment
report (including EMP), IR plan, or IP
plan, or audit reports reviewed by
your organization? If yes, please
provide the names of documents
reviewed.

What were the main environmental,
IR and IP issues associated with this
subproject, and how were the issues
dealt with?




Were any conditions or covenants
related to E&S issues made along
with the investment? If yes, please
briefly describe.


Does the subproject comply with
applicable domestic and ADB
safeguard requirements? Any
incidents of non-compliance?
Please describe how you ensure
subproject E&S compliant.


How you monitor the subborrower
and its subproject’s performance?
Please describe supporting docs
such as E&S monitoring reports.


FI’s portfolio by Sub/Sectors

Please provide an indicative % of FI‟s portfolio, or only those financed under ADB project if it
can be separated from its entire portfolio.

Industrial Sector or subsector
Subloan in XX year
By subloan amount

Number
In USD

--- Page 83 ---
Appendix 6
27



Additional Information for the Reporting Period

Please provide the number of subprojects where a field visit was conducted to
review aspects including social E&S issues.





Please provide details of any accidents/ litigation/complaints/regulatory notices
and fines, their causes and corrective actions being taken.





Please state any difficulties related to the ESMS implementation. What are the
possible causes and actions being taken by your organization? What are the
recommendations of ADB’s mission?