--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Operation Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

SPA Circular No.1







Date: 03/09/2020

All Authorized Dealers in Foreign Exchange and
Airlines/Shippinglines/General Sales Agents/
Travel Agents in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Remittance of surplus earnings by foreign airlines operating in Bangladesh

Please refer to paragraphs 1 and 2(A), chapter 10 and relevant paragraphs, chapter 12 of the
Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions-2018 (GFET), Vol-1 and subsequent circulars
regarding the instructions on remittances of surplus earnings of foreign airlines operating in Bangladesh.

02. To bring simplification in transaction modalities of foreign airlines, it has been decided
that surplus earnings may be calculated on the basis of passage and freight collections.
Accordingly, ADs shall allow remittance on account of surplus earnings against passage and
freight based on actual realization provided that (i) all collections are supported by bank
statements, (ii) minimum provision at 10 percent on total passage collections is maintained for
refund of unavailed journeys and (iii) necessary adjustments are made for all disbursements
including accrued expenses, refunds, and income tax paid/payable. Unused portion of the
provision so maintained may be added back in the following periods. Remittance is, however, to
be allowed out of the fund available, without borrowed one, in the designated bank account. In
addition, it has also been decided that:

(a) Requirement of Form P/Form P-2 from outgoing passengers against sales of tickets in
local currency will no longer be required. Accordingly, submission of documents as per
Appendices 5/56 and 5/57 stipulated at paragraph 2(A)(i) and 2(A)(ii), chapter 10 of GFET
shall stand revoked. As such, instructions in relevant paragraphs at chapter 12 of GFET shall
stand amended. The instruction to phase out Form P/Form P-2 shall equally be applicable for
foreign shipping Companies and Bangladeshi airlines/shipping Companies operating in
international routes. In accordance with revised instructions, applications shall, as required
under paragraphs 12(b), 14(a) and 17, chapter 12 of GFET, be forwarded to Bangladesh Bank
without these forms.
Cont’d to page - 2

--- Page 2 ---
(b) Submission of statement of passage as per appendix 5/44 will not be required for IATA
member airlines. Instead, airlines will henceforth submit IATA system generated documents
– (i) BSP airline billing summary and (ii) BSP Settlement Report, including system generated
counter sales and excess baggage sales report containing full details of each transaction, and a
summary statement of revenue and expenditure as per Annexure-A.

(c) Airlines shall no longer be required to submit copies of documents, excepting bank
statements, documents against payment of different types of applicable taxes such as FATT,
excise duty, embarkation fee, TDS and so on, in support of disbursements. Instead, they shall
retain the documents at their end for submission to ADs and inspection team of Bangladesh
Bank, as and when required as per paragraph 12(v), chapter 12 of GFET.

03. In case of non-IATA member airlines, above instructions shall be applicable excepting
2(b) above.

04. Other relevant instructions in this regard shall remain unchanged. As usual, ADs shall
observe KYC and AML/CFT standards, follow usual reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank, and
ensure compliance of regulations concerning duties/taxes applicable against the transactions.

Please bring the above instructions, effective immediately, to the notice of your concerned
constituents.

Yours faithfully,
Encl. As stated

(Maksuda Begum)
General manager
Phone: 9530127

--- Page 3 ---
Annexure-A
Statement of revenue/collection and expenditure
For the month of……………….
Name of the airlines: ……………..
Figure in Taka
Particulars
Amount
Total Amount
Cargo sales


Sales through CASS, if any

1st fortnight




2nd fortnight




Total


Direct/GSA sales



Total


Total cargo revenue

Passenger sales


Sales through BSP

1st fortnight




2nd fortnight




Total


Direct/GSA sales
1st fortnight



2nd fortnight



Total


Total passenger revenue

Other miscellaneous collection (if any)


Total miscellaneous collection (if any)

Inward remittances during the month
Total revenue including inward remittances (A)

Expenditure

Disbursements

Other Adjustments (if any)


Total Expenditure (B)

Provision for refund @ .. %
Less/Add: Unused/short provision of earlier period
Net Provision (C)
Amount available for remittance (A-B-C)
Less: Other adjustments (if any)
Amount remittable
Amount applied for remittance
Balance carried forward
Declaration by airlines
We do hereby declare that the statement furnished above is a complete and factually correct statement pertaining to
operations during the month of ……………. During the reporting month, we have remitted ........... (amount in
foreign currency) for which necessary payment of applicable taxes of Tk........ for ……, ….., ….. and ……. have been
deducted/paid. We do undertake to be held responsible for false statement/declaration, if detected, under FER Act,
1947.

Signature:

Name of designated official of airlines/authorized agent:
Designation:
Date:........................