--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 2

Website: www.bangladesh-bank.org
www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

Financial Stability Department

Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Post Box No.325
Dhaka


04 Poush 1420
FSD Circular No. 02
Date:---------------------------

18 December 2013
Chief Executives

All Scheduled Banks & NBFIs in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,

User Manual of ‘Interbank Transaction Matrix’ Template

Interconnectedness among the banks and other depository institutions sometimes
causes risks for themselves. Moreover, if the problem is systemic then such risks will not
remain confined within a specific institution rather it will cause risks to other
interconnected financial institutions, e.g., banks and non-bank financial institutions
(NBFI). With an aim to prepare banks and NBFIs for withstanding financial crisis and
make them aware of potential threats, endogenous or exogenous, Bangladesh Bank is
going to introduce a tool "Interbank Transaction Matrix" from January, 2014. It is a
monitoring tool to be used to observe liquidity management of banks and NBFIs. This
matrix would help in finding such institutions and give early warning signals for
safeguarding financial institutions as well as the system from liquidity stresses in
financial institutions and interbank market. It will also uncover the interrelation and
interdependence in the interbank market. In this regard, a ‘Data Template’ and a ‘User
Manual’ have been prepared.

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 2

It has been decided that all scheduled banks and NBFIs will start monthly
reporting henceforth as per the User Manual and specified Data Template (Input Format),
contained in a Compact Disk (CD), within six (6) working days after the end of each
month. Initially banks and NBFIs will submit appropriately filled in separate Data
Template for the month of July to December, 2013 (6 individual months) within 28
January 2014. Banks and NBFIs have to collect the CD from the Financial Stability
Department, Bangladesh Bank within 2 January 2014.
From January, 2014 and onwards, banks and NBFIs will submit the Template
within the aforementioned deadline.
Banks and NBFIS have to submit only the softcopy of the Template through
email to General Manager of Financial Stability Department (gm.fsd@bb.org.bd ). They
are not required to submit hard copy of the Template. The filled in Template should be
sent from the official email address of concerned bank/ NBFI, preferably from Head of
Treasury/ Compliance. Use of any personal email address is strongly discouraged.
Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours sincerely,

(Debashish Chakrabortty)
General Manager
Phone: 02-9530279