--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
www.bb.org.bd
FE Circular No. 16
Date: April 09, 2017.
All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh
Dear Sirs,
Release of foreign exchange on account of visa fee.
Please refer to paragraph 11, chapter 11 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transaction-2009 (GFET), Vol-1 in terms of Authorized Dealers (ADs) are allowed to remit
abroad consular fees collected in Taka account of foreign embassies in Bangladesh. Paragraph
12, ibid permits remittance on account of immigration visa processing fees, evaluation fees,
rights of landing fee of the concerned authority abroad.
02. It is observed that foreign embassies in Bangladesh in some cases arrange collection
of visa fee through their nominated resident agents. Such collection by resident agents as visa fee
within the purview of paragraph 11, chapter 11 of GFET may be remittable abroad to bank
account designated by embassies or their home offices. In this context, ADs shall observe the
following instructions:
(a) Collection of visa fee shall be as per the rate determined by the concerned embassies;
(b) ADs shall obtain invoice from embassies/home offices supported by visa applicant-
wise statement of collection;
(c) ADs shall ensure deduction of applicable taxes.
03. It has been decided that fees relating to immigration as per paragraph 12, chapter 11
of GFET may also be remittable to the agents nominated by the concerned authorities. As usual
ADs shall comply with relevant instruction in this regard.
04. In terms of paragraph 3(b) of FE Circular No. 47, dated August 03, 1993, visa fee is
remittable abroad provided that embassies of those countries are not situated in Bangladesh. This
is to clarify that such fee is also remittable to the visa agents abroad nominated by the concerned
countries, subject to compliance of instructions contained in the above mentioned circular.
Please inform the contents of this circular to the notice of all your concerned constituents.
Yours faithfully,
(Md. Abdul Mannan)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 9530319.