--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 2






Date: 11 February, 2015
All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Release of foreign exchange in the form of USD notes
Reference is drawn to the instructions mentioned in Para 1 and 6 of Chapter 12, Guidelines for Foreign
Exchange Transactions, 2009 (Vol-1) and FE Circular No. 17, dated April 06, 2014 regarding issuance of USD in
cash favoring outgoing Bangladesh/foreign nationals for travelling abroad.
02. From now on following instructions will have to be followed for releasing foreign exchange in the form of
cash USD notes:
A. Foreign exchange in the form of cash USD notes not exceeding 5000 (five thousand) may be issued in
favor of outgoing Bangladesh nationals against their respective entitlements such as private travel quota/business
travel quota/travel for treatment abroad/study abroad etc. or any other general or special permission per person per
trip; the reminder amount of entitlement or the entire entitlement may be released in the form of cash note of
other freely convertible foreign currencies. To mention, the entitlements may be utilized also through international
cards (credit/debit/pre-paid as applicable) as mentioned in the different para of chapter 19 of the above mentioned
Guidelines.
B. The limit mentioned in 02(A) will also be applicable to outgoing Bangladesh/foreign nationals for issuing
cash USD notes against their balances in respective foreign currency accounts (Private Foreign Currency
Accounts, Resident Foreign Currency Deposit Accounts, Exporters’ Retention Quota Accounts etc.) or from the
balances of Convertible Taka accounts (or against equal amount of foreign exchange under back to back basis)
per person per trip; the reminder amount or the entire amount may be released in the form of cash notes of other
freely convertible foreign currencies from the balance of the respective foreign currency account in a trip.
03. Other regulations regarding issuance of foreign exchange (including presentation of passport, ticket, etc., as
the case may be) will remain unchanged as stated in the said Guidelines and/or subsequent circular(s).
04. This circular has been issued in accordance with Section 20(3) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947
(Act VII of 1947).
Please bring the content of this circular to the notice of all concerned.

Yours faithfully
Signed\-
(Jagannath Chandra Ghosh)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 9530092
Translated