--- Page 1 ---
বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক
প্রধান কার্যালয়
মতিঝিল, ঢাকা-১০০০ ব্যাংকিং প্রবিধি ও নীতি বিভাগ
বাংলাদেশ |
website: www.bb.org.bd

বিআরপিডি সার্কুলার নং-০৮ তারিখ: ----------------
১৫ জুন ২০২৩

ব্যবস্থাপনা পরিচালক/প্রধান নির্বাহী কর্মকর্তা
বাংলাদেশে কার্যরত সকল তফসিলি ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠান।

ডিজিটাল ব্যাংকের গাইডলাইন্স প্রণয়ন প্রসঙ্গে

সাম্প্রতিক সময়ে নিত্যনতুন প্রযুক্তির ব্যবহারের ফলে সমগ্র বিশ্বে অন্যান্য খাতের মতো আর্থিক খাতেও সেবা
প্রদানের ধরনে বৈচিত্র্য এসেছে। এ লক্ষ্যে বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক ইতোমধ্যে প্রান্তিক জনগোষ্ঠীর আর্থিক অন্তর্ভুক্তির লক্ষ্যে

বিভিন্ন বিকল্প ডেলিভারি চ্যানেল, তথা-মোবাইল ফাইন্যান্সিয়াল সার্ভিসেস (MES) এবং অন্যান্য ই-ওয়ালেটের মাধ্যমে

on

জিটাল পদ্ধতিতে আর্থিক সেবা প্রদানের জন্য ব্যাংক ও অন্যান্য প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহকে অনুমতি দিয়েছে।

০২। বাংলাদেশ সরকারের ঘোষিত লক্ষ্য “স্মার্ট বাংলাদেশ* বিনির্মাণের উদ্দেশ্যে বিশ্বব্যাপী প্রচলিত তথ্য
প্রযুক্তিনির্ভর ডিজিটাল ব্যাংকিং সেবা জনগনের নিকট পৌঁছে দেয়ার মাধ্যমে ক্যাশলেস বাংলাদেশ সৃষ্টির লক্ষ্যে বাংলাদেশ
ব্যাংক ডিজিটাল ব্যাংক প্রতিষ্ঠার উদ্যোগ গ্রহণ করেছে। এ প্রেক্ষাপটে, বাংলাদেশে ব্যাংক ব্যবস্থার আইনী কাঠামো,
দেশের আর্থ-সামাজিক প্রেক্ষাপট, প্রযুক্তিনির্ভর ব্যাংক ব্যবস্থায় বাংলাদেশের বর্তমান অবস্থান ইত্যাদি বিষয়সমূহ

বিশ্লেষণপূর্বক “ডিজিটাল ব্যাংক স্থাপন বিষয়ক গাইডলাইন্স' (বাংলা ও ইংরেজী) প্রণয়ন করা হয়েছে।

০৩। উক্ত গাইডলাইস আপনাদের ও সংশ্লিষ্ট সকলের অবগতির জন্য বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংকের ওয়েবসাইটে
আপলোড করা হলো |

আপনাদের বিশ্বস্ত,
সংযুক্তি: বর্ণনা মোতাবেক। Shea 5 a

(মোঃ আলী আকবর ফরাজী)
পরিচালক (বিআরপিডি)
ফোন-৯৫৩০২৫২

--- Page 2 ---
GUIDELINES TO ESTABLISH
DIGITAL BANK



























Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank

--- Page 3 ---
Page | ii





































Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank

--- Page 4 ---
Page | iii


Preamble

Digital innovation is continuously modifying the landscape of the financial system all over the
world. Bangladesh Bank (BB) promotes an enabling regulatory environment that allows
innovation to make the financial system more robust, efficient and secure. Accordingly, the BB
recognizes the role of digital platforms in driving greater efficiency in the delivery of financial
products and services and in widening the outreach of the financial system. In this light, the BB
has developed a „Guidelines to Establish Digital Bank‟.

This „Guidelines to Establish Digital Bank‟ is a compilation of instructions that must be
followed by applicant/promoter/sponsor/shareholder who are willing to establish a digital bank
in Bangladesh. The instructions of the guidelines should be followed by the proposed digital
banks along with Bank Company Act (BCA), 1991 (Act No. XIV of 1991) (as amended) and
other guidelines, circulars & circular letters published by Bangladesh Bank from time to time.



(Abu Farah Md. Nasser)
Deputy Governor
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.

June 2023

--- Page 5 ---
Page | iv

--- Page 6 ---
Page | 1


GUIDELINES TO ESTABLISH DIGITAL BANK
1 Policy stance
1.1 Bangladesh Bank (BB) in principle decided to go with the pace of global banking and
payment service by adopting Fintech and digital solutions emerging in the globe to
attain the objectives of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and National Financial
Inclusion Strategy (NFIS). Indeed, BB is envisaging the challenges of 4th Industrial
Revolution (4IR) by pondering an alternative of traditional brick and mortar model of
banking.
1.2 BB, in the meantime, permitted banks to provide different alternate delivery channels,
Mobile Financial Services (MFS) and other e-wallets digital solutions to facilitate the
access to finance for the marginal people. BB recognizes the role of digital platforms in
driving greater efficiency in the delivery of financial products & services and expanding
low-cost access to finance for the unserved and underserved market segment.
1.3 A branchless end-to-end virtual banking system can give the banking system a mileage
and momentum to reach the banking at the last mile of the country for creating
employment opportunities, ensuring economic and financial stability of the economy as
well as ensuring a sound financial ecosystem for the country.
1.4 In this light, BB endeavors to promote an enabling regulatory environment that allows
responsible innovation to flourish, promotes cyber resilience, and contributes to
advancing the digitization of the financial industry. Towards this end, BB has developed
a framework for „digital bank‟ as a distinct classification of bank.
1.5 Digital banks are exposed to the same set of risk identified in the BB risk management
framework for conventional banks; thus, are expected to have effective governance
structures and risk management processes that appropriately identify, measure, monitor
and control the risks exposed to its business model, strategies, processes and products. In
this respect, digital banks shall be subject to the same standards on corporate
governance, among others, that are applicable for conventional banks.
1.6 A digital bank (DB) shall have to obtain a license from Bangladesh Bank under Section
31 of the Bank Company Act1 (BCA), 1991 and must comply the provisions of
Bangladesh Payment and Settlement Systems Regulations, 2014 to carry out banking
business in Bangladesh.
1.7 The guidelines shall govern the establishment of digital banks in compliance with the
BCA, 1991 (as amended), Bangladesh Payment and Settlement Systems Regulations,
2014 and the directives, circulars and prudential regulations of BB.
2 Status of the digital bank
2.1 Each DB shall be a public limited company (PLC) licensed under Section 31 of Bank
Company Act, 1991.

1 ব্যাংক ককযম্পযনী আইন, ১৯৯১ (১৯৯১ সননর ১৪ নাং আইন)

--- Page 7 ---
Page | 2

3 Paid up capital requirement
3.1 A DB shall commence with the paid-up capital of minimum BDT 125.00 (One hundred
twenty-five) crores or as determined by BB under section 13 of the Bank Company Act,
1991. The Paid-up capital shall only be comprised with the ordinary shares.
3.2 Paid-up capital, subscribed capital, authorized capital and voting rights of share-holders
shall be governed by the section 14 of the BCA, 1991.
4 Mode of payment
4.1 The capital contribution made by the sponsors and subscribers of the proposed bank
shall be made in cash. Moreover, this must be in unencumbered form, held in a local
scheduled bank‟s account that has to be verified and kept under a lien in favor of
Bangladesh Bank.
5 Sponsors share capital contribution
5.1 Initial minimum Paid-up capital shall be provided by sponsors of the proposed DB.
5.2 DB must go for Initial Public Offering (IPO) within 5 (five) years from the date of
license issued by BB; the amount of IPO should not be less than the sponsor‟s initial
paid-up capital.
5.3 The minimum shareholding stake of each sponsor shall be BDT 50.00 lacs.
5.4 The maximum shareholding stake of each sponsor stipulated in BCA, 1991, in
consultation with the government, may be relaxed in case of a digital bank, if necessary.
5.5 Substantial shareholder of DB‟s paid-up capital shall have to sign a capital maintenance
agreement (CMA) (Annexure X) stating that they would, jointly and severally inject
additional capital if the bank ever fell below any minimum paid up capital requirement.
In case of failure to inject such capital within the stipulated time, the responsibility
would fall on individuals within the sponsors to bear the entire burden of the required
injection. „Substantial shareholder‟ shall be defined according to the explanation of the
section 14kha of Bank Company Act, 1991.
5.6 Sponsors' contribution to the share capital of the proposed DB will be required to be out
of net worth declared to the Tax authorities. Sponsors' contribution out of borrowings
from bank or financial institutions or from anywhere else, even from family members,
shall not be acceptable.
5.7 Any enterprises, companies, individuals or any members of his/her family who is a
current loan defaulter with any Banks or Financial Institutions shall not be eligible to
apply as a sponsor.
5.8 An individual awaiting verdict of any indisposed lawsuit in any court/tribunal against
his/her loan defaulter status shall not be eligible to apply.
5.9 Sponsors‟ share shall not be transferred within a period of 5 (five) years from the
commencement of the business, without prior permission from BB. But Bangladesh
Bank will not give permission to transfer the shares of the sponsors within 3 (three)
years from the commencement of the business.

--- Page 8 ---
Page | 3


6 Fit and Proper Test (FPT) for sponsors/directors
6.1 The sponsors/directors must qualify in the Fit and Proper Test (FPT) criteria (Annexure-
VIII) applicable for the directors of DB.
6.2 BB shall evaluate expertise and integrity for the purpose of FPT of proposed sponsors
and any potential conflicts of interest.
6.3 In the event of any change(s) in the sponsors and directors, the appointment of the
incumbent shall be subject to the FPT.
6.4 BB, as a part of the FPT, may consider financial performance of the businesses in which
sponsors‟ have control or their associated enterprises, particularly businesses offering
financial services; Here control shall be defined as minimum of 50% ownership of that
businesses; and associated enterprises shall be defined according to the explanation in
section 5(GaGa) of Bank Company Act, 1991.
6.5 Any sponsors who evaded any existing law of Bangladesh or accused of any criminal
offences can not be included in the Board of Directors.
7 Constitution of the board of directors
7.1 Board of Directors shall be formed according to the Section 23 of BCA, 1991 and
relevant directives of Bangladesh Bank.
7.2 Size of the Board shall be decided in accordance with section 15(9) of BCA, 1991 (as
amended). This restriction shall apply to appointment or reappointment of the directors
against retirement or filling casual vacancy subject to section 15KaKa of BCA, 1991 (as
amended).
7.3 No members from a family can be a director against the maximum number of directors
allowed from a single family under section 15(10) and 14kha of BCA, 1991 (as
amended).
7.4 Board preferably shall include at least 50% members having education, knowledge and
expertise related to technology-based banking, emerging technologies, cyber laws and
regulations; and remaining members shall have adequate knowledge and expertise in
banking, e-commerce and banking laws & regulations and so like.
8 Fit and Proper Test (FPT) of management
8.1 The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) shall have at least 15 (fifteen) years of experience in
the banking profession including at least 5 (five) years‟ experience in technology-based
banking, regulations, guidelines, circulars etc. Appointment of CEO shall be subject to
compliance of regulations and directives issued by BB in this regard from time to time.

--- Page 9 ---
Page | 4

8.2 Chief Operating Officer (COO), Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Chief Information
Technology Officer (CITO), Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), Chief Risk
Officer (CRO), Head of Internal Control & Compliance (HICC) shall have at least five
(5) years experience in technology-based banking. Appointment of COO, CFO, CITO,
CISO, CRO, HICC and other key officials shall be subject to compliance of regulations
and directives issued by BB in this regard from time to time.
9 Operational framework
9.1 A digital bank (DB) shall require establishing a registered head office in Bangladesh to
serve the main point of contact for stakeholders, including the BB and other regulators.
9.2 The registered head office shall host the offices of management and the support staffs. It
also serves as the central hub for receiving and resolving customer complaints both
physically and digitally.
9.3 An automated Artificial Intelligence (AI) supported technology-based dispute resolution
mechanism shall be always active to resolute day to day disputes aroused from
transactions, whether there is any intimation or not made by the customer.
9.4 It shall offer efficient, low-cost and innovative digital financial products and services
through online end-to-end tech-based digital ecosystem using AI, machine learning,
block chain and other advance technologies of 4th Industrial Revolution (4IR) to serve
the customer.
9.5 It is allowed to use the agents of conventional banks or MFS providers, network of
existing ATM/CDM/CRM and MFS network instead of its own agents complying
regulations of Bangladesh Bank from time to time.
9.6 It shall not provide any over the counter (OTC) service, and shall not have any branch,
sub-branch, window, agent, or any ATM/CDM/CRM of its own.
9.7 It may issue virtual card, QR Code or any other advanced technology-based product for
facilitating its customer transactions.
9.8 It is restricted to issue any physical instruments for transactions.
9.9 It is allowed to execute permissible transactions, other than trade and guarantee
services, subject to having Authorized Dealer (AD) license under the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, in foreign exchange pertaining to inward remittances,
outward payments, and maintaining eligible foreign currency accounts in compliance
with regulatory framework in force including retention of compatible digitized
records.
9.10 It may finance or lend to other sectors except foreign trade finance and term loan to
medium and large industries.
9.11 It will be allowed to participate relevant re/pre-finance schemes introduced by BB
from time to time.

--- Page 10 ---
Page | 5

9.12 It shall have to maintain the minimum Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory
Liquidity Ratio (SLR) prescribed by Bangladesh Bank from time to time under article
36 of Bangladesh Bank Order 1972 and section 33 of BCA, 1991 respectively.
9.13 It shall maintain Advance to Deposit Ratio (ADR) to the percentage as determined by
BB from time to time.
9.14 It shall maintain at all times a Capital to Risk Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) and
liquidity ratios (LCR-Liquidity Coverage Ratio and NSFR-Net Stable Funding Ratio)
as per BASEL III RBCA guidelines or as per instructions given by BB in this regard
from time to time.
9.15 It shall comply with Deposit Insurance Scheme of BB under „Bank Deposit Insurance
Act, 2000‟.
9.16 It has to comply with Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities guided by CSR
policy of BB or as per instructions given by BB in this regard from time to time.
9.17 It shall duly inform its customers and potential customers of its financial products and
services and ensure the appropriate security measures of the products and services.
9.18 It shall take all necessary steps to aware its customers about the procedures of its
operation.
9.19 It shall ensure compliance of “The Bankers‟ Book Evidence Act, 20212” and with the
other relevant data protection laws and regulations in force.
9.20 It shall be a member of the payment platforms operated by BB and shall ensure the
compliance of rules and regulations of Bangladesh Payment and Settlement Systems
Regulation 2014.
9.21 It must oblige any other prudential limits or regulatory requirements prescribed by BB
from time to time.
9.22 It shall follow the AI based Alternative credit scoring guidelines issued by BB from
time to time regarding the analysis of customers‟ credit risk.
9.23 It shall accept the movable properties of the customers as the collateral security
included in the Movable Property Collateral Registry.

10 ICT governance framework
10.1 It must have a robust, sophisticated, manageable ICT infrastructure and application
systems. It shall have at least tier three Data Center (DC) and Disaster Recovery Site
(DRS) in the different seismic zone.
10.2 It may take Cloud service but the location of the Cloud must be within the territory of
Bangladesh.
10.3 It must also have ICT Business Continuity Plan (ICT-BCP), ICT Risk Management
Plan in place.

2 ব্যাংকযর বহি সযক্ষ্য আইন, ২০২১ (২০২১ সননর ২৭নাং আইন)

--- Page 11 ---
Page | 6


10.4 „Guidelines on ICT Security for Banks and NBFIs‟, Version 3.0, May 2015 (as
amended from time to time) issued by BB shall be applicable. As per the guidelines
DB should maintain the following items at a minimum (but not limited to):
It shall have separate ICT Steering Committee and ICT Security Committee and
their rules and responsibility will be defined as per section 2.1.2 and 2.1.3;
It shall have a comprehensive ICT Security Policy;
It shall have to conduct internal and external audit as per section 2.4 and 2.5
respectively;
It shall have a well-defined ICT Risk Governance and Management mechanism
as per chapter 3 of the guidelines;
It shall have to build up and maintain Data Center (DC), Physical Security,
Environmental Security, Fire Protection System etc. as per section 5.5;
It shall have to perform Vulnerability Assessment and Penetration Testing
(VAPT) for infrastructure and applications as per section 5.12;
It has to prepare and maintain Business Continuity Plan (BCP) and Disaster
Recovery Plan (DRP) as per section 7.1 and 7.2. It shall also develop a backup
and restoration methodology and maintain accordingly as per section 7.3;
It has to follow the project management procedure for any ICT project as per
section 8.1;
It shall have to develop alternative delivery channels for easy service delivery to
the end/remote customer;
It may use outsourced infrastructure or applications. In those cases, it shall
follow the section 10.1 for outsourcing, 10.3 for service level agreement (SLA)
management; and
All the transactions as well as data in transit must be end-to-end encrypted.
Cryptography mechanism should be in place where applicable as per section 5.8.
10.5 It has to follow BB guidelines named „Core Banking Solution (CBS) Features and
Controls‟ November 2016 for using of core banking solution.
10.6 It shall identify and resolve the possible technological risk, settlement risk and
operational risk in its system.
10.7 It shall comply with all available policies and guidelines issued by Bangladesh Bank
and Government.
10.8 It shall obtain necessary standard certifications for its applications and infrastructures.
10.9 The ICT infrastructure must be audited by an internationally accredited audit firm and
the report of such audit to be submitted for licensing.

--- Page 12 ---
Page | 7


11 Customer due diligence
11.1 It shall be subject to compliance of the prudential regulations set out by the government
and BB applicable for them including corporate governance and risk management,
particularly on information and communication technology, cyber security, outsourcing,
consumer protection, Anti-Money Laundering (AML), and Combating the Financing the
Terrorism (CFT).
11.2 It shall not use customers‟ information for purposes other than its designated business. It
shall not ask for any private information from its customer which may breach the
customer‟s privacy; it shall take prior permission from BB regarding the purposes and
types of information it intends to collect from its customers.
11.3 The Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements, transactional limits and minimum
technological security will be subject of the review process by the BB at the time of
giving license. The factors to be considered by BB may include the following but not
limited to:
(i) KYC requirements;
(ii) Transactional limits (limits commensurate with customer‟s profile);
(iii) Maximum balance limits on debit and credit;
(iv) Minimum technological security requirements; and
(v) Two factor authentication (TFA) i.e., use of a photo ID, Personal identification Number
(PIN) or any other secret code or message during transactions.

12 Required documents/information/analysis to be submitted to Bangladesh Bank
An applicant need to submit the online application through the web portal of Bangladesh
Bank only after depositing application processing fee (non-refundable) of Taka 5 (Five) lacs
in favour of Bangladesh Bank through the same portal (relevant charges should be borne by
the applicant). The following documents along with the application including detailed
information and analysis need to be submitted, otherwise the application will not be
considered:
1. Application, name, address, telephone number, email address of the Applicant and the
contact person;
2. Feasibility Report on the proposed DB (Annex II), including an analysis of Bangladesh's
macroeconomic environment, financial system, as well as a Business Plan (Annexure
III), ICT Plan (Annexure IV) and Business Resolution Plan (Annex V)
for the proposed bank, financial projections and sensitivity analyses;

--- Page 13 ---
Page | 8

3. Biographical Reports (Annexure VI and VII) and proof of citizenship for each
promoter/sponsor/director, CEO/MD, Chief Operating Officer (COO), Chief Financial
Officer (CFO), Chief Risk Officer (CRO), Chief Information Technology Officer
(CITO), Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), Head of Internal Control &
Compliance (HICC) of the proposed bank along with Passport sized photographs, NIDs
and passports. In case of foreign nationals, copies of their national identification cards
and passports, duly authenticated by the Embassy/High commission of Bangladesh in
the respective countries;
4. CIB report for each sponsor, CEO and other principal officers (COO, CFO, CRO, CITO,
CISO, HICC, etc.);
5. Proposed compensation package, other terms and conditions of the COO, CFO, CRO,
CITO, CISO, HICC, etc.;
6. Minutes of the shareholders (sponsors) meeting;
7. Written agreement by the shareholders (sponsors) to establish the DB;
8. Proposed name of the DB and drafts of the Memorandum of Association and Articles of
Association;
9. For a corporate promoter; Board Resolution, Articles of Incorporation and By-laws, list
of directors and officers, list of shareholders, audited financial statements for the last
three years, certified copies of the Memorandum of Association and Articles of
Association [Annexure VI(B)];
10. Declarations of sponsors as per Annexure IX;
11. List of entities in which the sponsors‟, sponsor directors as well as their family members
and their dependents are interested as directors, chief executives, partners, proprietors or
shareholders. Further, list of banks and latest balance sheets/accounts of such entities are
also to be provided;
12. Last three years Annual Report and balance sheets/accounts (audited where applicable)
of all those entities in which the sponsors and sponsor directors have majority stake or
substantial ownership;
13. Names of the banks and financial institutions with which the sponsors and sponsor
directors have been dealing as well as relevant account numbers and names of branches
and, where relevant, credit reports from those banks;
14. Previous experience of sponsors and sponsor directors in banks, microfinance
institutions, Mobile Financial Services, ICT Company/firm, Payment Service Provider
(PSP), Payment System Operator (PSO), e-commerce firms, telecommunication
companies, and other entities to be mentioned in submitted biographical report;
15. Enforceable undertaking from the sponsors as per the format in Annexure XI;
16. Undertaking for accumulation of Minimum Paid-up capital along with an enforceable
and executable Capital Maintenance Agreement (CMA) (Annexure X) in relation to
Minimum Paid-up Capital Requirements (MPCR);
17. Any additional documents or information required by BB, in support of the application.

--- Page 14 ---
Page | 9


13 Application evaluation process
13.1 Short listed application shall be evaluated by a panel of members to be nominated by
the Governor, Bangladesh Bank (BB).
13.2 Successful applicant will get the Letter of Intent (LOI) from BB for establishing DB.
13.3 The LOI shall automatically be repealed if the proposed DB fails to comply with the
conditions stipulated therein.
13.4 The LOI shall be repealed and sponsors‟ activities shall be subject to punishment
under section 109(2) of BCA, 1991 if BB finds that they have willfully certified or
provided false or misleading information while applying for license for a DB.
13.5 BB shall have the right not to issue a DB license if it is not completely satisfied with
the conditions stipulated in section 31(4) of the BCA, 1991.
13.6 BB shall have the right to cancel the license issued under section 31of the BCA, 1991
for any reason that triggers those mentioned in the section 31(5) of the said act.

14 General conditions
14.1 Bangladesh Bank, if necessary, from time to time, may modify, revise or impose any
of the conditions of the guidelines and incorporate new ones complying with section
31(2) of the BCA, 1991 upon its full satisfaction while issuing license.
14.2 Notwithstanding anything mentioned in the guidelines, Bangladesh Bank shall have
the right and discretion to take any decision required to be made under the guidelines.
14.3 The business, governance and operational requirements applicable to traditional banks
in general, shall continue to apply with DBs. In case of any inconsistency, the
guidelines shall prevail.
14.4 Any reiterations of general aspects that apply to traditional banks are only for
emphasis and shall not be interpreted to exclude any relevant requirements which have
not been reiterated in the guidelines.
14.5 DB shall not engage itself in any activities unless otherwise explicitly mentioned in the
guidelines or permitted by BB.

--- Page 15 ---
Page | 10


ANNEXURE I
LETTER OF APPLICATION

Date:

Director (BRPD)
Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

Subject: Application to establish a Digital Bank in Bangladesh.

Dear Sir:

In accordance with Section 31 of the Bank Company Act, 1991, we would like
to apply for establishing a Digital Bank in the style of <Name of the proposed Digital
Bank> in Bangladesh. As required, the documents requested by Bangladesh Bank are
submitted.

We are looking forward to receive your approval for the establishment of the
proposed institution at your earliest convenience.

Sincerely yours,


Signature:

Name:

Proposed designation:

Address:

Telephone number:

Cell number:

Email:

--- Page 16 ---
Page | 11

ANNEXURE II
FEASIBILITY STUDY


1. Assessment of the business landscape:
i. Socio-economic analysis,
ii. Banking and payments environment analysis,
iii. Legal and regulatory framework analysis,
iv. Analysis of prevailing digital eco-system,
v. Competitor analysis.
2. Analysis of the target market and the market gaps that the applicant targets to fill in.
3. Value proposition of an innovative, robust and sustainable digital bank, including how it
shall leverage the sponsors’ existing businesses and/ or experiences/ capabilities.
4. Target products and services along with customer value propositions, and a description
of how these will address the specific needs of target customer segments.

--- Page 17 ---
Page | 12

ANNEXURE III
BUSINESS PLAN

1. Identify the customer segment.
2. A list of proposed financial products and services along with explanation regarding how
the products will address the specific needs of the target market.
3. Detailed financial projections (bank-wise and for each of the major business line/
customer segment e.g. consumer banking, SME banking, microfinance, agriculture
financing) covering a period of at least five years from the commencement of
commercial operations. In case the break-even period is more than five years, the
projections should cover the extended period. As guidance, applicants could develop
financial projections broadly using the main financial statement formats applicable in
general to commercial banks. An analysis of the rationale of the key assumptions that
forms the basis of the pro-forma financial statements should be provided.
4. Sensitivity analysis, including reasonable stress scenarios, stressed projection and
contingency plans.
5. Investment/ financing plan for compliance with MCR as per Regulation and other capital
and liquidity requirements
6. Business Continuity Plan
7. A list of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) that will be used to measure whether the
DB’s performance is in line with its objectives.
8. Business risk analysis and risk management strategy
9. Human resource plan (in line with core competencies required in product development,
digital service delivery and emerging tech).
10. Customers’ query management/complaint resolution plan
11. Distribution strategy, channels/ customer access points and their alignment with overall
business and operating strategy/ model.
12. Envisaged collaboration and co-creation arrangements, including preferred engagements
options with fin-techs, integration with e-commerce eco-system and on-line market place
13. Consumer protection and data protection strategy
14. Marketing plan, assessment of creating access to finance, coverage of customer base etc.

--- Page 18 ---
Page | 13

ANNEXURE IV
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) PLAN

ICT Plan shall cover the followings at a minimum:
(1) A description of the technology stack used in the infrastructure, including–
(a) overview of network architecture diagram for DC, NDC and FDC(DRS); and
(b) overview of deployment strategy and model for critical and core systems including
CBS, alternate delivery channels etc. along with relevant business flow;
(2) A description of the applicant’s strategy to adopt relevant new technologies and digital
innovations to meet the on-going and future financial inclusion objectives as well as to
gain competitive advantage. The strategy shall clearly outline how the new technologies
and digital innovations are used to address the following attributes–
(a) flexibility: flexibility of solution to integrate with various platforms or emerging
technologies with minimal changes or disruptions to core systems; and
(b) scalability: modularity in design to ensure adaptability of changing market trends;
(3) A description of the planned ICT governance (including its ICT governance structure) to
oversee–
(a) ICT Policy
(b) ICT Risk Management Committee
(c) ICT Security Committee
(d) Cyber risks;
(e) ICT strategic plan and cyber strategic plan;
(f) ICT operations
(g) ICT incidents/problems management
(h) ICT projects;
(i) Service Level Agreement (SLA) management
(4) A description of the planned ICT operational management to effectively support business
operations including–
(a) overview of end-to-end ICT operational management
(b) proposed ICT organization structure; and
(c) business continuity plan and disaster recovery plan
(5) A description of the planned measures (technology, people and process) to ensure
system resiliency and high availability of services to its customer; and
(6) A description of the planned measures (technology, people and process) to effectively
manage cyber security threat/risk and cyber attacks including the arrangement to identify,
prevent, detect, response, mitigate and recover from a cyber security threat and cyber
incidents
(7) Use of AI, ML, IoT or 4IR technology etc.

--- Page 19 ---
Page | 14

ANNEXURE V
BUSINESS RESOLUTION PLAN
1. The applicant of a DB must submit a Business Resolution Plan (BRP). Its purpose is
to ensure that the DB, should it become necessary, can unwind its business
operations, in an orderly manner without causing disruption to the customers and the
financial system.
2. The full implementation of the BRP must result in the winding down or transfer of
the licensed DB’s business. The BRP must cover the sources of funding, liquidity
and a minimum time horizon of the business plan addressing different stress
scenarios as well as the DB’s likely responses.
3. The envisaged BRP may include (without limitation) and involve portfolio exit,
liquidation of the bank or sale to a third party. All such options shall be explored
with adequate risk assessments. Further, the overall exit time estimates shall also be
indicated in the plan.
4. The BRP shall also provide for adequate protection of customer/ depositor interests,
responsible and effective communications with the concerned stakeholders, and
minimizes disruption to the financial system.
5. The BRP shall remain dynamic to reflect current circumstances and hence be
reviewed regularly and updated. The updated plan shall be approved by the DB’s
Board and shared with BB, along with a summary of revisions and justifications for
any material changes.
6. DB shall establish alerts or thresholds which may lead to an evaluation and decision
of whether to put various contingency measures in place or to resort to invoking the
exit strategy itself.
7. The BRP must include the following points:-
a) The trigger points of activating BRP which should be comprised of, but are not
limited to–
i. Capital-related triggers such as leverage ratio and common-equity Tier 1 ratio;
ii. Liquidity-related triggers such as loan-to-funds ratio;
iii. Earnings-related triggers such as return on assets and return on equity; and
iv. Asset quality-related triggers such as non-performing loan ratio.
b) Probable options and operational measures that minimize disruptive effects on
customers and the financial system while the exit procedure is being
implemented;
c) Potential impediments to the execution of planned exit options and probable
measures to mitigate the impact of such impediments; and
d) Sources of funding and liquidity for implementing the BRP and the estimated
timeframe to exit from the business;
e) The channels to be used to repay depositors.

--- Page 20 ---
Page | 15


8. Within the Business Resolution Plan, the applicant is required to demonstrate
the following–
(a) The necessary capabilities required to extract and aggregate real time data on
depositors and customers upon request, including up-to-date contact information
and alternative bank accounts to facilitate any pay-out; and
(b) The necessary capabilities and resources required to ensure continuity of
services throughout the implementation of the BRP, with a specific focus on
continuity of services under outsourcing arrangements.
9. Depending upon its assessment, the BRP shall be executed by the DB and the DB
shall inform BB of its intention to do so, at least three months prior to the planned
date.
10. BB may call for the DB to execute the Board approved BRP, if needed.
11. The BRP to be executed shall be finalized in accordance with BB’s advice and
approved by the Board of Directors (BoD) of DB. DB shall execute the plan within
the timeframe defined therein.
12. During the exit period, DB shall ensure full discharge of all its connected obligations
and responsibilities to customers, BB and other stakeholders.
13. Throughout the exit period, the DB shall submit periodic Board approved reports, as
advised by BB before the execution of BRP, demonstrating the progress against the
approved BRP by BoD.
14. Execution of BRP is subject to compliance to BCA, 1991 and other applicable laws
and regulations.

--- Page 21 ---
Page | 16

ANNEXURE VI
BIOGRAPHICAL REPORT ON SPONSORS/DIRECTORS

1. Full Name:
2. Date of Birth:
3. Place of Birth:
4. Citizenship:
Passport Number: Date and Place of Issue:
5. Full Address:
(a) Permanent:
Telephone Number:
(b) Present, if different from the Permanent:
Telephone Number:
6. Marital Status:
If married,
Spouse's Name:
Occupation:
Spouse's Passport Number:
Date and Place of Issue:
Near Relations (parents, children, brother, sister) and dependents:
Name (First, Middle, Last)
Relationship
Age













Education
Name & Address
of Institution
Dates of
Attendance
Major Area
of Study
Degree Awarded
& Date
High School




Undergraduate




Graduate




Professional
or Technical




Training /
Seminar

--- Page 22 ---
Page | 17

Present Occupation:
Organization Name:
Business Address:
Nature of Business:
Job Title:
Telephone Number:

Business Record (pertaining to the preceding 10 years).

Name & Address
of Organization
Dates of Engagement
Position Held
Responsibilities


10. Describe each enterprise, including the name, address, type of enterprise [public (listed or
not), private] your percentage of ownership and the type of business of each enterprise or
other entity in which you are or have been involved as a member of the board of directors,
senior management (or any equivalent body), significant participant, or general partner.


List names, addresses and percentage of control and/or ownership of other incorporators,
partners and directors of the entity or enterprise referred to above.

11. Experience of sponsors and sponsor directors in banks, microfinance institutions, Mobile
Financial Services, ICT Company/firm, Payment Service Provider (PSP), Payment System
Operator (PSO), e-commerce firms, telecommunication companies, and other entities:
12.

Do you perform any services for or have any business connections with
any institution which is subject to the supervision of Bangladesh Bank, or
any other authority of the government of Bangladesh?
If "Yes," indicate the name of the institution, address and nature of your
work.
Yes
No

13.

Have you had, or do you now have, any financial interest, direct or
indirect, in any institution/bank under the supervision of any Government
authority?
If "Yes," give the name of the institution, address and nature of the
financial interest.
Yes
No

14.
Being a sponsor of a proposed bank, how and from what sources will you
pay for your proposed amount of share capital?


Own cash
Yes ( ) No ( )
Other sources
If "Yes," give details
Yes ( ) No ( )

--- Page 23 ---
Page | 18


15. Tax Identification Number (TIN):
(Submit most recent returns and/or Tax Clearance Certificates, and certified IT10BForms).

16. Are you disqualified from election or nomination or from occupying the office of Bank
Director owing to the following circumstances?

a. You have less than 10 years of professional experience,
b. You are insane or mentally unsound,
c. You are insolvent and adjudicated bankrupt,
d. You have been convicted by a court in any criminal offense or have been
involved in any fraud/forgery, financial crime or other illegal activities,
e. You are a Director of any other banking company,
f. You are a partner in any contract with a banking company in the capacity of legal
advisor, advisor, consultant, etc.

17. Answer the questions below as they apply to you as an individual, or to any enterprise
with which you are or have been involved as a member of the board of directors, senior
management, or any equivalent body, significant participant, or general partner (described
as a “relevant enterprise”). Include facts that occurred in Bangladesh or in any other
jurisdiction. If “yes,” provide full details.

Except for minor traffic violations:
Are any arrests, indictments, or criminal proceedings now pending
against you or any relevant enterprise?
Yes( ) No( )
Have you, or has any relevant enterprise, ever been convicted of any
criminal offense or found liable for any fraudulent activity?

Yes( ) No( )
Have you, or has any relevant enterprise, ever been judged bankrupt?

Yes( ) No( )
Have you, or has any relevant enterprise, ever been subject to legal,
recovery or collection proceedings due to financial issues?

Yes( ) No( )
Are you or any relevant enterprise currently involved in any legal
proceedings involving financial problems, or are you expecting to become
involved in such proceedings?

Yes( ) No( )
Have you ever been required to pay unpaid debts on account of liability for
the bankruptcy of any relevant enterprise with which you are or have been
involved, pursuant to bankruptcy legislation or other comparable legal
provisions?
Yes( ) No( )
Have you ever been determined to have provided inaccurate and/or
incomplete information to any financial supervisory authority?

Yes( ) No( )
Have you ever been refused, or had revoked, any license, authorization,
permit, or similar document, or exemption by any financial supervisory
Yes( ) No( )

--- Page 24 ---
Page | 19

authority?
Have you, or has any relevant enterprise, ever been involved in any matter,
that has led to any corrective measure, sanction, or penalty, or comparable
action being taken by any financial supervisory authority?
Yes( ) No( )
Have you ever been refused registration, incorporation or the amendment of
the articles of association in accordance with the Companies Law, or
comparable legislation of a foreign jurisdiction?
Yes( ) No( )
Have you ever been subject to civil or criminal penalties for any of the
offenses enumerated below, in accordance with the Tax Code in
Bangladesh, or comparable legislation elsewhere?

a) deliberate submission of an incorrect or incomplete tax return,
individually or any relevant enterprise for which you currently have, or have
had, responsibility for submitting such returns;

b) intentionally or through gross negligence, causing a tax assessment to be
issued for an insufficient amount, or causing an insufficient tax to be levied,
regarding the yourself or any relevant enterprise for which you currently
have, or have had, responsibility for such matters;

c) taxes due from yourself, or from any relevant enterprise for which you
are or have been responsible for submitting wage withholding taxes, not
having been paid on time; or

d) intentionally or through gross negligence causing the insufficient
withholding of taxes, or causing taxes to not be paid on time, with regard to
yourself or any enterprise with which you are or have been involved, and in
which you have or has had responsibility for making such payments?
Yes( ) No( )
Have you ever been refused, or had revoked, a license, authorization, permit
or equivalent document to practice a given profession (including, but not
limited to, the legal, accounting, auditing or actuarial professions)?
Yes( ) No( )
Have you ever been subject to investigatory or disciplinary proceedings by
any public body or other organization responsible for regulating any
profession (including, but not limited to, the legal, accounting, auditing or
actuarial professions), and this procedure has led to measures being taken
against you by such organization?
Yes( ) No( )
Have you ever been subject to any formal disciplinary action by an
employer (including a written warning, reprimand, suspension or dismissal)
by your current or a former employer due to improper fulfillment of your
duties or compliance with a code of conduct in connection with the
fulfillment of your position?
Yes( ) No( )
Have you, or has any relevant enterprise, ever been investigated by any
public authority, or been involved in any legal proceedings involving
dishonesty, fraud, or improper business practices on the part of the yourself
or such enterprise?
Yes( ) No( )
Has any relevant enterprise ever defaulted on servicing obligations
(principal and/or interest) on outstanding debt or been involved in
unacceptable foreign exchange transactions?
Yes( ) No( )

--- Page 25 ---
Page | 20
18. As a sponsor of this proposed bank, I agree to hold at least Taka 50 lac (or its
equivalent) of the equity capital to be issued by the proposed bank.


The undersigned affirms that the statements made and answers given
herein are accurate and complete and here by authorizes the Bangladesh Bank to make
any inquiry it deems appropriate in connection with processing this questionnaire.
False statements in this questionnaire will be sufficient cause for denial of a license to
establish banking operations in Bangladesh.


Signature of Sponsor/Director:
Name:
Date:

Place:


Witnesses:

Signature: _________________________

Signature: _________________________

Name: _________________________

Name: _________________________

Address: _________________________

Address: _________________________

--- Page 26 ---
Page | 21



ANNEXURE VI (b)
SPONSORS/DIRECTORS AS CORPORATE PROMOTOR

1. Full Name of the company:
2. Date of incorporation:

3. Registration Authority
4. Nature of Business:
5. Address:


A. Board Resolution,
B. Articles of Incorporation and By-laws,
C. List of directors and officers,
D. List of shareholders,
E. Audited financial statements for the last three years,
F. Certified copies of the Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association.

--- Page 27 ---
Page | 22

ANNEXURE VII
BIOGRAPHICAL REPORT ON CEO/
PRINCIPAL OFFICERS (COO, CFO, CRO, CITO, CISO, HICC, ETC.)
1. Full Name:

2. Date of Birth:
3. Place of Birth:
4. Citizenship:
NID number:
Passport Number:
Date and Place of Issue: Right‐to‐work in
Bangladesh Visa Type:
Expiration Date:
Yes( )
No ( )
5. Full Address:

(a) Permanent:

Telephone Number:

(b) Present, if different from the Permanent:
Telephone Number:

6. Marital Status:
If married, Spouse's Name:
Occupation:
Spouse's Passport Number:
Date and Place of Issue:

Education
Name &
Address
of Institution
Dates of
Attendance
Major Area
of Study
Degree Awarded
& Date
High School
Undergraduate
Graduate
Professional
or Technical
Training /
Seminar

Present Occupation:
Organization Name:
Business Address:

Nature of Business:
Job Title:
Telephone Number:

--- Page 28 ---
Page | 23




9. Service Record (pertaining to 5 years' experience in technology based banking
profession). Please submit supporting documents.
Name & Address of
Organization
Dates of
Engagement
Position Held Responsibilities









10.

Do you perform any services for or have any business
Yes
No
Connections with any institution which is subject to the supervision of
Bangladesh Bank, or any other authority of the government of
Bangladesh?


If "Yes," indicate the name of the institution, address and nature of your
work.



11.


Have you had, or do you now have, any financial interest, direct or
indirect, in any institution under the supervision of any Government
authority?
Yes
No
If "Yes," give the name of the institution, address and nature of the
financial interest.

12. Tax Identification Number (TIN):
(Submit most recent returns and/or Tax Clearance Certificates, and certified IT10B forms).

13. Are you disqualified for the post of CEO/Principal Officers owing to the following
circumstances?
(1) You have less than 5 years of technology based banking experience.
(2) You are insane or mentally unsound,
(3) You are insolvent or adjudicated bankrupt,
(4) You have been convicted by a court in any criminal offense or have been
involved in any fraud/forgery, financial crime or other illegal activities.
(5) You are a Director of any banking company.
(6) You are a partner in any contract with a banking company in the capacity of
legal advisor, advisor, consultant, etc.

14. Answer the questions below as they apply to you as an individual, or to any
enterprise with which you are or have been involved as a member of the board of
directors, senior management, or any equivalent body, significant participant, or general
partner (described as a “relevant enterprise”). Include facts that occurred in Bangladesh
or in any other jurisdiction. If “yes,” provide full details.

--- Page 29 ---
Page | 24


Except for minor traffic violations:

Are any arrests, indictments, or criminal proceedings now
pending against you or any relevant enterprise?

Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you, or has any relevant enterprise, ever been convicted of
any criminal offense or found liable for any fraudulent activity?
Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you, or has any relevant enterprise, ever been judged
bankrupt?

Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you, or has any relevant enterprise, ever been subject to legal,
recovery or collection proceedings due to financial issues?

Yes ( ) No ( )
Are you or any relevant enterprise currently involved in any legal
proceedings involving financial problems, or are you expecting to
become involved in such proceedings?

Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you ever been required to pay unpaid debts on account of
liability for the bankruptcy of any relevant enterprise with which you
are or have been involved, pursuant to bankruptcy legislation or
other comparable legal provisions?

Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you ever been determined to have provided inaccurate and/or
incomplete information to any financial supervisory authority?

Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you ever been refused, or had revoked, any license,
authorization, permit, or similar document, or exemption by any
financial supervisory authority?

Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you, or has any relevant enterprise, ever been involved in any
matter, that has led to any corrective measure, sanction, or penalty,
or comparable action being taken by any financial supervisory
authority?

Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you ever been refused registration, incorporation or the
amendment of the articles of association in accordance with the
Companies Law, or comparable legislation of a foreign
jurisdiction?

Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you ever been subject to civil or criminal penalties for any of
the offenses enumerated below, in accordance with the Tax Code in
Bangladesh, or comparable legislation elsewhere?

Yes ( ) No ( )

--- Page 30 ---
Page | 25

a) deliberate submission of an incorrect or incomplete tax return,
individually or any relevant enterprise for which you currently
have, or have had, responsibility for submitting such returns;

b) intentionally or through gross negligence, causing a tax
assessment to be issued for an insufficient amount, or causing an
insufficient tax to be levied, regarding the yourself or any relevant
enterprise for which you currently have, or have had,
responsibility for such matters;

c) taxes due from yourself, or from any relevant enterprise for which
you are or have been responsible for submitting wage
withholding taxes, not having been paid on time; or

d) intentionally or through gross negligence causing the insufficient
withholding of taxes, or causing taxes to not be paid on time, with
regard to yourself or any enterprise with which you are or have
been involved, and in which you have or has had responsibility
for making such payments?
Have you ever been refused, or had revoked, a license, authorization,
permit or equivalent document to practice a given profession
(including, but not limited to, the legal, accounting, auditing or
actuarial professions)?
Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you ever been subject to investigatory or disciplinary
proceedings by any public body or other organization responsible for
regulating any profession (including, but not limited to, the legal,
accounting, auditing or actuarial professions), and this procedure has
led to measures being taken against you by such organization?
Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you ever been subject to any formal disciplinary action by an
employer (including a written warning, reprimand, suspension or
dismissal) by your current or a former employer due to improper
fulfillment of your duties or compliance with a code of conduct in
connection with the fulfillment of your position?
Yes ( ) No ( )
Have you, or has any relevant enterprise, ever been investigated by
any public authority, or been involved in any legal proceedings
involving dishonesty, fraud, or improper business practices on the
part of the yourself or such enterprise?
Yes ( ) No ( )
Has any relevant enterprise ever defaulted on servicing obligations
(principal and/or interest) on outstanding debt or been involved in
unacceptable foreign exchange transactions?
Yes ( ) No ( )

--- Page 31 ---
Page | 26




The undersigned affirms that the statements made and answers given herein are
accurate and complete and here by authorizes the Bangladesh Bank to make any inquiry it
deems appropriate in connection with processing this questionnaire. False statements in this
questionnaire will be sufficient cause for denial of a license to establish banking operations
in Bangladesh.

Signature of the CEO/Principal Officer ______________________
Name:
Date:
Place:




Witnesses:

Signature _____________________________________
Name:
Address:


Signature _____________________________________
Name:
Address:

--- Page 32 ---
Page | 27

ANNEXURE VIII
FIT AND PROPER TEST CRITERIA FOR APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS
FOR DIGITAL BANK

Fit and Proper Test:
The concerned person must have management/business or professional
experience for at least 10 (ten) years having five (5) years with application based
banking service provider, Electronic Money Issuer (EMI), Fintech and electronic
payment system;
(ii) Persons with adequate experience in dealing with retail customer segments in a
bank, Financial Institution, Micro Finance Institute (MFI) or Fintech company
that deals in payments and/or lending should get preference.
(iii) Persons with adequate knowledge and experience in any of emerging
technologies and trends, such as cloud, open API, cyber security, and advanced
data analytics, Artificial Intelligence (AI), Internet of Things (IoT), Machine
Learning (ML) and so like should get preference.
(iv) Persons having adequate knowledge and experience in banking, banking laws,
regulations, guidelines, circulars etc should get preference.
He/she has not been convicted in any criminal offence or involved in any
fraud/forgery, financial crime or other illegal activities (Police clearance
certificate to be submitted);
(vi) He/she has not been subject to any adverse findings in any legal proceedings,
(vii) He/she has not been convicted in regard to contravention of rules, regulations or
disciplines of the regulatory authorities relating to financial sector;
(viii) He/she has not been involved with a company/firm whose registration/license
has been revoked or cancelled;
(ix) Loans taken by him/her or allied concern from any bank or financial institution
have not become defaulted;
He/she has not been adjudicated a bankrupt by a court;
(xi) He/she must be loyal to the decisions of the board of directors. However, in case
of note of dissent, he/she may record it in the minutes of the board meeting
and/or bring it to the notice of Bangladesh Bank considering its merit.
2. A person, proposed as a candidate for the office of directors, shall furnish along with
the consent letter for the purpose of section 93 of the Companies Act, 1994 a declaration
as per the attached format that he/she is not disqualified to become a bank director in
accordance with the above mentioned fit and proper test.
3. The declaration shall have to be signed by the concerned person (candidate) and if
elected it shall have to be forwarded to BB by the Chairman of the board of directors.
4. The above mentioned restrictions for qualifications of bank directors shall be in addition
to any related laws/regulations for the time being in force.

--- Page 33 ---
Page | 28

ANNEXURE IX
DECLARATION
I (name, father and mother’s name, Spouse name, address) do hereby declare that I
am eligible to become a director of Bank Company as per the fit and proper test criteria
mentioned in the Guidelines to Establish a Digital Bank. I further declare that:

a) I have not been convicted in any criminal offence or involved in any fraud/forgery,
financial crime or other illegal activities;
b) There is no adverse opinion/findings regarding me in any legal proceedings,
c) I have not been convicted in regard to contravention of rules, regulations and
disciplines of the regulatory authorities relating to financial sector;
d) I have not been involved with a company/firm whose registration/license has been
revoked or cancelled;
e) There are no loans taken by me or my allied concern from any bank or financial
institution that have become defaulted;
f) I have not been adjudicated a bankrupt by a court;
g) I have no unpaid undisputed arrear of income tax assessed for the current and any past
year.
h) I am not penalized or awaiting court/tribunal verdict on any suit for offence under section
21 of Income Tax Ordinance, 1984.
i) I have no indisposed Tax prosecution reopened under section 93 of Income Tax
Ordinance, 1984.
j) I have no unpaid liability for any undisputed customs duty, VAT, supplementary duty,
excise duty.
k) I have not awaiting verdict on any prosecution under customer Act, 1969; VAT act,
1991; Excise & salt Act, 1944 in any court/ tribunal shall not be eligible to be me.
l) My spouse, parents, children, brothers and sisters or any other person dependent on
me is not a director of this bank.


Dated:
Signature:




Countersigned:
Chairman, Board of Directors
……...….……….…. Bank PLC.

--- Page 34 ---
Page | 29

ANNEXURE X
CAPITAL MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT (CMA)

We, the undersigned, hereby declare that we are now, or intend to become, sponsor
shareholders of …………….. BANK PLC. with a qualifying holding as stated in the clause 5.5
of GUIDELINES TO ESTABLISH DIGITAL BANK.
We, the undersigned, also hereby declare that we understand the minimum paid up capital
requirement (MPCR) of regulatory capital of the …………….. BANK PLC which must be the
amount specified in section 13(2) of the Bank Company Act, 1991 (BCA, 1991) i.e. stipulated
percentage of total risk weighted assets of the bank as declared by Bangladesh Bank (BB) from
time to time.
We, the undersigned, also hereby agree that in the event of the Bank’s capital falls below the
minimum paid up capital requirement (MPCR) at the end of any calendar quarter, (March 31,
June 30, September 30, or December 31) that we will undertake to:
 Convene an extraordinary session of the General Meeting of Shareholders no later than
30 (thirty) days after the end of the said quarter the `discovery’ date of MPCR short fall.
Report the results of the proceedings of the Meeting of Shareholders to Bangladesh
Bank within 7 (seven) days from such meeting.
 Inject additional capital to the bank in an amount sufficient to eliminate the MPCR short
fall no later than 75 (seventy five) days after the discovery date, or with the consent of
Bangladesh Bank taking any other steps to meet the MPCR short fall within the time
frame fixed by Bangladesh Bank.
We, the undersigned, also hereby agree that failure of the said meeting of Shareholders to
decide on a method of eliminating the capital deficiency within the required time frames or
failure of the bank to implement the agreed-upon method, renders each of us individually liable
to inject additional capital in the bank in an amount sufficient to eliminate the MPCR shortfall
subject to the provision of BCA, 1991. Bangladesh Bank will decide, in its solo discretion,
which specific shareholders should be held individually liable, the amounts for which they are
liable, and the timing of such required injection of capital. If after such injection the MPCR still
falls short, Bangladesh Bank shall have absolute discretion to instruct the bank as deemed
necessary.
In witness whereof, we have hereunto set our hands:
Witness
(Name & signature)
Sl. no
Name of the Sponsors
Signature of the Sponsors








Place

Date


Company Seal

--- Page 35 ---
Page | 30


ANNEXURE XI
FORMAT FOR SPONSORS’ UNDERTAKING

To
Director (BRPD)
Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

I/We [name of natural or legal person], [name of father/husband in case of natural person], of
[residential address in case of natural person, registered address in case of legal person], [NID
number in case of Bangladeshi citizen natural person, nationality and passport number in case of
non-Bangladeshi citizen natural person, country of incorporation and corporate registration number
in case of legal person] (hereinafter referred to as the “Sponsor”, which term includes
representative heirs, executors/administrators, legal representatives/successors and assigns), a
proposed sponsor of [name of digital bank] (hereinafter referred to as the “Proposed Digital
Bank”), jointly and severally undertake to the foregoing:
a) Sponsor shall ensure that the proposed Digital Bank shall meet any and all requirements
and obligations of the Proposed Digital Bank, including but not limited to ensuring ongoing
compliance monitoring of the Minimum Paid up Capital Requirement, Capital Risk
(Weighted) Adequacy Ratio and other capital and liquidity requirements as may be
applicable to the proposed Digital Bank.
b) Sponsor shall ensure that in the event of discontinuation of the proposed Digital Bank, the
Sponsor shall personally discharge any and all outstanding deposit liabilities in accordance
with instructions received from Bangladesh Bank.
c) Sponsor shall ensure that the Proposed Digital Bank complies with all the terms and
conditions of any license granted to the Proposed Digital Bank by Bangladesh Bank and all
other applicable legal and regulatory requirements.
d) Sponsor undertakes and confirms that the funds that will be used to establish the Proposed
Digital Bank have not and will not borrow from bank or financial institutions or from
anywhere else, even from family members.
e) Sponsor undertakes and confirms that the name of the Sponsor or any person associated
with the Sponsor has not been included on the United Nations Security Council Consolidated
List or any other list of banned, proscribed or blacklisted individuals or other entities enlisted
by the Government of Bangladesh or by any foreign government.
f) Sponsor confirms that the undertakings stated herein shall constitute perpetual, irrevocable
and enforceable obligations against the Sponsor, and the Sponsor will not be relieved from
these obligations or any part thereof for any reason whatsoever without the prior written
consent of Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 36 ---
Page | 31

IN THE WITNESS THEREOF these presents have signed the day hereinbefore written by the
Sponsor.
Signature:
Name:
Address:
NID/Passport Number:
Date:
Place:


Witness No. 1: Name:
Address:
NID/Passport Number:


Witness No. 2: Name:
Address:
NID/Passport Number: