--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Operation Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
www.bb.org.bd.


FEOD Circular No-2 Date: January 06, 2019

All Authorized Dealers of
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh.

Dear Sir,

Submission of Monthly/Quarterly statement by Local
agents of Foreign Courier Service Companies .

Please refer to Paragraph-2(C), Chapter-10, Volume-1 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions (GFET), 2018.
02. Foreign courier service companies/their local agents operating in Bangladesh shall submit monthly
statements as per Attachment-1 to their respective ADs along with Annexure-A and other Supporting documents
annexed herewith for remitting the surplus earnings to their Head Office/Principal abroad. ADs shall examine
the submitted documents meticulously while ascertaining surplus earnings. They shall also make sure that due
VAT and income taxes are paid complying the VAT and income tax act. After ascertaining the surplus earnings,
the ADs shall approve form TM and remit surplus earnings to concerned Head office/Principal abroad. After
effecting remittance, the ADs shall forward one full set of all papers including copy of approved form TM to the
concerned Head Office/Branch office of Bangladesh Bank for post-facto examination within 15(fifteen) days of
the following month.
03. Courier service companies that operate on behalf of their foreign principal on Free Delivery basis and
do not remit surplus earnings to their Head office/Principal abroad, are instructed to submit quarterly statements
as per Attachment-2 to Bangladesh Bank through their respective AD's along with Annexure-B and other
supporting documents annexed herewith.
04. Besides submission of Monthly/Quarterly statement, courier service agents are instructed to submit
Annual Audited Financial Statement through their ADs.
05. Other instructions contained in Paragraph-2C, Chapter-10 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions (GFET), 2018 (Volume-1) shall remain unchanged.
ADs are advised to bring the above instructions, effective immediately, to the notice of all concerned
constituents.
Yours Faithfully

(Md. Shakhawat Hossain)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 9530478

--- Page 2 ---
Attachment-1


Supporting documents to be submitted along with monthly statement of courier service
companies(Annexure-A).

Remittance Application.
Invoices issued by head office/principal abroad for the claimed amount.
Approved Form TM mentioning TM ID and remittance information. (APP.5/9 of GFET-2018);
Sales Summary Report of Inbound & Outbound Revenue.(Appendix-1);
Computation of Tax. (Appendix-2) ;
Tax Challan copy in support of payment of tax.
Auditors' Report certified by a registered chartered accountant. (Appendix-3)
Undertaking. (Appendix-4)
Statement of Commission Earned. (Appendix-5);
Statement of Air Freight Charges (Supported by invoices raised by Freight Forwarder/Airlines).
(Appendix-6) ;
Statement of Professional/Audit and Tax consultancy Fee. (Appendix-7);
Copy of Encashment Certificate. (if any);
Invoices issued by Audit Firm or Tax consultancy Firm.
Copy of AIT and VAT challan in support of payment of Audit or Tax consultancy fees.
Supporting documents in support of payment of VAT received from clients against Outbound Shipment.

--- Page 3 ---
Attachment-2

Supporting documents to be submitted along with Quarterly Statement of courier service companies
operating on Free Delivery basis and does not remit surplus earnings to their Head office/Principal
abroad (Annexure-B).

Application of the Client.
Sales Summary Report of Inbound & Outbound Revenue.(Appendix-1);
Statement of Air Freight Charges (Supported by invoices raised by Freight Forwarder/Airlines).
(Appendix-6) ;
Statement of Professional/Audit and Tax consultancy Fee. (Appendix-7);
Invoices issued by Audit Firm and Tax consultancy Firm.
Copy of AIT and VAT challan in support of payment of Audit and Tax consultancy fees.
Computation of VAT. (Appendix-8) ;
Challan copy and "Moshuk-19" in support of payment of VAT.
Undertaking. (Appendix-9)
Copy of Encashment Certificate in support of inward remittance. (if any);
Income Tax Certificate and Tax return copy of the Agent.
Agent can pay tax on yearly basis.Tax Challan Copy in support of payment of Tax.
Annual Audited Financial Statement of the agent.

--- Page 4 ---
Annexure-A


Statement of Income and Expenses

For the month of-------
Principal:----------------
Agent:---------------



Particulars
Amount(TK)
A.Income

SL.NO
Particulars

Inbound Revenue (Charges Collect)

Outbound Revenue (Prepaid)

Inward Remittance(If Any)

Total Income

B. Expenses

Commission/Service Charge/Delivery Charge
On Inbound and Outbound Shipment

Air Freight (If Any)

Audit/Professional Fees

Legal or Tax Consultancy Fees

Other Expenses(If Any)

Total Expenses

Remitable Amount Before Tax (A-B)

Income Tax

Remitable Amount After Tax

--- Page 5 ---
Annexure-B


Statement of Income and Expenses

For the Quarter of-------
Principal:----------------
Agent:---------------



Particulars
Amount(TK)
A.Income

SL.NO
Particulars

Outbound Revenue.

Local Collections.

Inward Remittance(If Any)

Total Income

B. Expenses

Inboud document/Parcel delivery charge

Air Freight(If Any)

Audit/Professional Fees

VAT Paid

Other Expenses

Total Expenses

Profit Before Tax

Tax Payable

Profit After Tax

--- Page 6 ---
Appendix-1
Sales Summary Report of Inbound & Outbound Revenue
For the month of-----------
S.L
Product Name
Product
Type
Number of
Shipment
Weight
(Kg)
Rate
Revenue
(Taka)



















































Appendix-2
Computation of Tax under Income Tax ordinance 1984.
For the month of----------
Total Remittable Amount
Rate of Tax
Amount of Tax

Encl.: Photocopy of Challan No: ---------- aggregating to Taka -------- for payments under
Income Tax Ordinance 1984.

Appendix-3
Auditors' Report
We have examined the books and records relating to the transactions of (Principal Company's
Name) in Bangladesh carried on by their agent (Agent's Name) for the month of ------------------.

We certify that the attached computation of remittable amount is found to be correct
and it truly reflects the revenue of Tk.--------------(in word) only as per the books and records and
as confirmed by the invoices raised by (Principal Company's Name).


Auditor's Signature
With date

--- Page 7 ---
Appendix-4

UNDERTAKING

We do hereby undertake in connection with our advice for remitting the surplus earnings of
BDT-------------- (in words) equivalent to USD/any other Foreign Currency only for the month of
------------------that if excess remittance is made or due taxes are unpaid anyhow or any kind of
irregularities/ discrepancies are found by Bangladesh Bank/ Authorized dealers/ Auditors or any
other competent authority during the subsequent scrutiny, the excess remittance shall be
repatriated/ adjusted by us forthwith as may be required. We shall also be accountable for the
irregularities/ discrepancies found.



Signature by Authorized person of the Agent
With date


Appendix-5

Statement of Commission Earned
For the month of----------
Particulars
Commission Percentage (%)/
Rate
Amount of Commission(BDT)
Total Outbound


Total Inbound


Total



Appendix-6
Statement of Air Freight Charges
For the month of----------
Name of
Airlines
Destination
Weight/Volume
Rate
Freight Charges

--- Page 8 ---
Appendix-7

Statement of Professional/Audit and Tax consultancy Fee
For the month of----------
Particulars
Amount (BDT)
Professional/Audit Fee
Add: VAT

Tax consultancy Fee(If any)
Add: VAT

Total








Appendix-8
Computation of VAT under VAT Act 1991.
For the month of----------
Particulars
Amount
Rate of VAT
Amount of VAT
Total Outbound Revenue
Total Local Sales

Encl.: Photocopy of Challan No: ---------- aggregating to Taka -------- for payments under VAT
Act 1991.

(f¨vU cwi‡kv‡ai ¯^c‡ÿ gymK-19 `vwLjc‡Îi Kwc I Pvjv‡bi Kwc AÎ wefv‡M `vwLj Ki‡Z n‡e|

Appendix-9
UNDERTAKING

We do hereby undertake that if any kind of irregularities/discrepancies are found in the submitted
documents by Bangladesh Bank/Authorized dealers/Auditors or any other competent authority
during the subsequent scrutiny or due taxes/VAT are unpaid, we shall accountable for the
irregularities/discrepancies found or be liable to pay due taxes/VAT.