--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department-1
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FEPD-1 Circular No. 08






Date: May 7, 2026

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh


Foreign exchange regulations regarding outward remittances
on account of transportation services

Dear Sirs,

Foreign exchange transactions on outward remittances are regulated by the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act (FER), 1947 and subsequent circulars issued thereagainst. To bring
ease in conducting outward remittances on account of transportation services, the existing
regulations have been compiled at one place with modifications as necessitated. Accordingly
relevant instructions in this regard available in the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions-2018 (GFET) and its subsequent circulars will stand repealed with issuance of this
circular excepting monthly reporting instructions contained in GFET, Vol-2.

02. This circular is issued with the authority vested to Bangladesh Bank under Section
20(3) of FER Act, 1947.

03. The instructions of this circular will remain valid for one year from the date of its
issuance. However, instructions to be issued within this period will be read with this circular.

Please bring the contents of this comprehensive circular to the notice of your constituents.

Faithfully yours,

(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD-1)
Phone: 9530123
Encl. As stated

--- Page 2 ---
Contents

Part A: Issuance of tickets and acceptance of freight for
international travel and transportation services

General…………………………………………………………………………...

Part B: Foreign exchange transactions on account of
foreign airlines and shipping companies

Freight and passage collections………………………………………………....
Remittance of surplus earnings of foreign airlines and shipping companies…...
13
Undertakings for adjustment/repatriation of excess amount……………………
16
Submission of returns to Bangladesh Bank……………………………………..
16

Part C Foreign exchange transactions of
Bangladesh Shipping Corporation and Bangladesh Biman

Operating expenses of Bangladesh Shipping Corporation and Bangladesh
Biman…………………………………………………………………………....

17

Part D Statements of private shipping companies and airlines

Statements/returns to be submitted by private shipping companies…………….
18
Submission of statement by Bangladeshi private airlines operating in
international routes………………………………………………………….......

18
Submission of statement by Bangladeshi shipping companies/airlines renting
their ships/containers/aircrafts…………………………………………………..

19

Part E Foreign exchange transactions for charter aircraft and ships

10.
Charter of Foreign Aircraft……………………………………………………...
20
11.
Charter of foreign ships…………………………………………………………
20
12.
Import through chartered ship: payment of freight charges to ship-owner
abroad…………………………………………………………………………....

21

Part F Remittance on account of courier services and railway companies

13.
Courier Services…………………………………………………………………
22
14.
Railway Companies: Remittance of surplus earnings of foreign railway
company by local agent…………………………………………………………
22
15.
Undertakings for adjustment/repatriation of excess amount……………………
23
Pages

--- Page 3 ---
ii

Part G Foreign exchange transactions of freight forwarders

16.
Instructions for multimodal transportation agencies…………………………
24

Part H Foreign currency accounts of shipping
companies, airlines and freight forwarders

17-18.
Foreign currency accounts of shipping companies, airlines and freight
forwarders………………………………………………………………………

25
19-21.
Eligible transactions through these foreign currency accounts……………......
25
22.
Reporting……………………………………………………………………….
26

Part I Foreign currency accounts in the names of
Bangladeshi shipping companies and airlines

23-25.
Opening and operations of foreign currency accounts in the names of
Bangladeshi shipping companies and airlines………………………………….

27

Part J Guidelines for tour operators

26.
Guidelines for tour operators…………………………………………………
28

Part K Foreign exchange transactions for agency services

27-28.
Instructions for foreign exchange transactions for agency services…………...
30

Part L Foreign exchange transactions for liaison offices, representative offices and other
places of business under Section 18B(1) of FER Act, 1947

29.
Instructions for offices established in Bangladesh Section 18B(1) of FER Act,
1947…………………………………………………………………………….

31

--- Page 4 ---
iii

APPENDICES

Appendix-1
Form FP

Appendix-2
Statement of freight/passage collection and disbursement in Bangladesh

Appendix-3
Statement of revenue/collection and expenditure

Appendix-4
Statement of Freight Collections by the foreign airlines

Appendix-5

Disbursement statement for airlines
Appendix-6

Statement of cancellation or refunds of passages
Appendix-7
Details of credit bookings of passage and freight realized in cash
Appendix-8

Details of outstanding bookings of passage and freight on credit

Appendix-9

Declaration by airline/shipping company/agent
Appendix-10
Certificate by AD bank

Appendix-11

FS-I: Statement of Freight/Passage Collections by the foreign shipping
companies
Appendix-12

FS-II: Details of credit bookings of passage and freight realised in cash
during the quarter ended

Appendix-13
FS-III: Details of outstanding bookings of passage and freight on credit

Appendix-14
FS-IV: Statement of Expenditure of foreign shipping companies

Appendix-15

FS-V: Statement of cancellations or refunds of freight/passages to be
submitted by the shipping company

Appendix-16
Statement of passages sold/tickets issued by the shipping company

Appendix-17
FS-VI: Statement of Commission and Income Tax

Appendix-18
FS-VII: Statement of Income and Expenditure of foreign shipping
companies

Appendix-19
Proforma of encashment certificate of authorised dealers

Appendix-20
Certificate of authorised dealers

Appendix-21
Certificate of authorised dealers

--- Page 5 ---
iv



Appendix-22
Particulars to be furnished for determination of tax liability under income
tax act, 2024 in respect of shipping business of non-residents

Appendix-23
Consolidated statement showing income & expenditure in respect of
foreign shipping corporation

Appendix-24
Consolidated statement showing earnings and expenditure in foreign
exchange by the foreign agents of Bangladesh shipping corporation

Appendix-25
Consolidated statement showing balance held abroad with banks, main
agents and other credit agencies

Appendix-26
Form of statement of earnings and expenditure to be submitted by
Bangladesh Biman

Appendix-27
Quarterly statement showing earnings and expenditure in Bangladesh in
respect of vessels owned by the private shipping companies

Appendix-28
Quarterly statement showing earnings and expenditure of the foreign
agents of Bangladesh shipping companies

Appendix-29
Consolidated statement of earnings, disbursement and net amount
repatriated to Bangladesh

Appendix-30
Statement showing details of debits & credits to foreign currency a/c

Appendix-31
Statement showing passage and freight collections and disbursements
made by overseas branch office/Agent

Appendix-32
Statement of passages sold/tickets issued in Bangladesh

Appendix-33
Statement of Freight Collection (Export from Bangladesh)

Appendix-34
Statement of Freight Collection (Import to Bangladesh)

Appendix-35


Appendix-36
Statement showing the particulars of shipments under outbound air/sea
cargo

Appendix-37
Statement showing the particulars of shipments under inbound air/sea
cargo

Appendix-38
Statement showing the particulars of shipments under outbound air/sea
cargo

--- Page 6 ---
Attachments
Attachment 1 (CS)
Supporting documents to be submitted along with monthly statement of
courier service companies (Annexure-A)

Attachment 2 (CS)
Supporting documents to be submitted along with quarterly statement
of courier service companies operating on free delivery basis and does
not remit surplus earnings to their Head office/Principal abroad
(Annexure-B)

Enclosure
Enclosure 1
User manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring System

--- Page 7 ---
Part-A
Issuance of tickets and acceptance of
freight for international travel and transportation services

1. General

(1) Airlines/shipping companies and their authorized travel agents have been given general
authority to issue tickets for travel abroad subject to the following instructions:

(a) If the passport of the intending traveler shows that the traveler is employed with any
Govt/Autonomous/Semi-autonomous bodies or public sector agencies, the airline/travel agent
may issue ticket only if the Order or NOC from the concerned administrative Ministry/Division
/Department authorizing the travel is produced.

(b) The above provision of issuance of ticket against payment in Taka would also be applicable
for those foreign nationals who work in Bangladesh with the approval of the competent
authorities of the Government of Bangladesh and draw their pay and allowances in Bangladesh
Taka; or whose costs of travel abroad, as per terms of their service, are to be borne by the
employing organization/agency. In such cases, attested photocopies (in duplicate) of sanction
letters of the competent authorities of the Govt. of Bangladesh and service contract should be
asked for before issuing tickets and shall be retained for inspection and record purposes.

(2) Travel of Bangladesh nationals to destinations outside the country on employment

The airline /travel agent should ask for the following documents before issuing/okaying tickets
for such travels:

(a) Valid passport with valid visa. In case the passport shows that the intending traveler is
employed with Govt. or with any Public Sector Agency/Autonomous body, Order/NOC from the
concerned administrative Ministry authorizing the travel abroad should be produced.

(b) Clearance from The Bureau of Manpower Employment and Training (BMET) in the form of
endorsement in passport.
(c) Visa/entry permit issued by the concerned country's Embassy/High Commission in
Bangladesh duly attested by the BMET. In case entry permit or visa including group visa is
issued from abroad, the same should be attested by the Bangladesh Mission in that country as
well as by the BMET. In case the entry permit or visa does not bear attestation by Bangladesh
Mission abroad, the genuineness of the employment is to be certified in clear terms by the
BMET.
(3) Travel abroad by Bangladesh nationals against tickets/PTAs received from abroad

Passages may be booked by the airlines/travel agents for the above category of travels on
production of valid passport with valid visa by the passengers subject to the condition that the

--- Page 8 ---
journey will be undertaken exactly for the routes for which tickets/PTAs have been received. If
the intending traveler is employed with the Govt. or with any public sector agency or
autonomous body, instructions of sub-paragraph (4) below should be followed. In case the PTAs
are meant for travel of Bangladeshi scholars/students for studies abroad, instructions of sub-
paragraph (5) below should be followed.

(4) Travel by Government, public sector, and autonomous body officials against PTAs
from abroad, with ticket costs borne by foreign Governments, UN/international
organizations or foreign universities for attending conference, seminars etc. or for any
other purpose abroad:

Airlines/travel agents may book passages for these travels on production of the following
documents/particulars to them by the travelers concerned:

(a) A photocopy or an authenticated copy of Order/NOC from the administrative Ministry
concerned authorizing the travel abroad. In cases where the visits are sponsored by any other
Ministry, a photocopy or authenticated copy of clearance from the sponsoring Ministry should
also be produced. These Orders/NOCs should be retained by the Airlines for their records.
(b) Valid Passport, with valid visa where required.

(5) Travel by Bangladeshi Scholars/Students for studies abroad against PTAs received
from abroad where cost of ticket is paid by foreign governments/foreign universities/
internationally reputed non-profit institutions:

Passages may be booked by the Airlines/travel agents for the above categories of travels on
production of photocopy or authenticated copy of Order/NOC from the Ministry which has
sponsored the travel and valid passport with valid visa. If the intending traveler is employed with
Government or with any public sector agency/autonomous/ semi- autonomous body, copy of the
Order/NOC from the administrative ministry concerned authorizing the travel should be asked
for before booking the passage. The Airline should retain the Order /NOC for their record.

(6) Travel by foreign nationals, foreign diplomats and privileged persons against
encashment of foreign currency notes or against inward remittance from abroad or by
debit to private foreign currency accounts/convertible Taka accounts maintained with ADs
in Bangladesh or against PTAs/tickets received from abroad:

Airlines/travel agents may issue tickets for the above category of travels for journeys originating
from abroad or from Bangladesh if the person undertaking the travel is the account holder
himself, his/her spouse/children or an employee of the firm/mission/company/organization
maintaining the foreign currency account/convertible Taka account subject to observance of the
following drill:
(a) For issuance of tickets against encashment of foreign currency notes or against encashment of
foreign exchange from private foreign currency account, encashment certificate issued by an AD

--- Page 9 ---
should invariably be produced by the traveler concerned to the airline/travel agent. The passage
should be booked within one month from the date of issue of the encashment certificate.
However, encashment certificate issued by Money changers will not be acceptable for issuing
tickets in this regard.

(b) Booking of passage against encashment of foreign exchange from foreign currency accounts
maintained by Bangladesh nationals is admissible only for passengers holding Bangladesh
passports. airlines/travel Agents should not issue tickets in favor of any foreign national against
encashment of foreign exchange from foreign currency accounts maintained by Bangladesh
nationals without prior approval of the Bangladesh Bank. Off-line airlines also should not issue
tickets against encashment of foreign exchange from foreign currency accounts of Bangladesh
nationals without prior approval of Bangladesh Bank.

(c) In case of issuance of tickets by debit to convertible Taka account, the cost of passage should
be accepted in the form of Account Payee cheques/Pay Orders drawn on the relevant convertible
Taka account in favor of the airline/travel agent. Where the account holder is not a Foreign
Mission, International Organization, diplomat or a privileged person, a certificate from the bank
concerned certifying that the account on which the cheque/pay order has been drawn is a
convertible Taka account and also stating the account number and the amount to be debited, will
have to be produced alongwith the Cheque/Pay Order. In cases where the account-holder is a
foreign diplomatic mission, diplomat/privileged person or expatriate personnel of UN and its
affiliated agencies or IMF, IBRD, IDA or other international or regional financial or loan giving
agency or their expatriate personnel, a declaration should be obtained by the airline/travel
agent/shipping company from the concerned organization/person showing the name of the bank
with which the convertible Taka account is maintained, the account number and the amount
debited towards cost of passage. The concerned airline/travel agent/shipping company should
submit these declarations to the ADs alongwith their usual monthly passage statements. The
airline/travel agent shall also obtain a certificate from the account-holder stating his/her
relationship with the passengers in case ticket is to be issued in favor of spouses or children; and
in case of issuance of ticket in favor of officers/staff of foreign missions/organizations,
certificate from the mission or the organization stating that the intending traveler is their
employee should be asked for. Airlines/travel agents will submit these certificates to the ADs
alongwith their usual passage statements.

(d) Passages may be booked for travel of foreign diplomats/privileged persons and other foreign
nationals in Bangladesh against PTAs/Tickets received from abroad. Tickets may also be issued
to foreign tourists against approved credit cards brought in by them from abroad. Issuance of
tickets for travel by foreigners not falling within the above categories would require prior
approval of Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 10 ---
(7) Travel by ship's crew of Bangladesh origin

(a) In case of ship's crew of Bangladesh origin proceeding abroad to join vessels abroad, tickets
may be issued against PTAs received from abroad as well as by debit to the foreign shipping
company's account maintained in Bangladesh in the name of the shipping company or shipping
agent. For issuance of tickets against foreign shipping company's account, payment of cost of
passage should be received by Account Payee Cheques drawn on the shipping company's
account. The concerned shipping agent/company should furnish certificate from its bank as per
proforma at Appendix-22 stating the name of the bank with which the account is maintained, the
name of the foreign shipping company and the amount to be debited. The certificate should be
submitted to ADs alongwith the usual monthly passage statements of the airline.
(b) Before issuing tickets favoring ship's crew of Bangladesh nationality, the airline/travel agent
must satisfy itself on the basis of documentary evidence that the crew possesses valid CDC and
clearance issued by shipping master of Government of Bangladesh about the recruitment abroad.
Copy of the shipping master's clearance should be forwarded alongwith the usual monthly
passage statement to ADs.
(8) Travel by ship's crew of foreign nationality

Outward passages of foreign ship's crew of foreign nationality may be booked against inward
remittances or by debit to foreign shipping company's account maintained in Bangladesh in the
name of the shipping company/shipping agent. For booking of passages against inward
remittances, the shipping agent/company should produce encashment certificate from the
concerned bank and the drill as contained in sub-paragraph 6(a) should be followed. In case of
booking of passages against payment from foreign shipping company's account, bank certificate
should be produced and the relevant instructions of sub-paragraph (7)(a) above should be
followed.

(9) Travel against rebated tickets issued by airlines/shipping companies

(a) Tickets against free passages [i.e. 100(hundred) percent rebated] allowed by the airlines/
shipping companies favoring their own employees including family members or to their travel
agents may be issued.
(b) In respect of partly rebated passages allowed by the airlines/shipping companies to their own
employees including family members or to their travel agents, tickets may be issued for travel
abroad once a year.
(10) Booking of passage for outward journey

(a) Booking of passage may be made for outward journey by a route and at a fare approved by
the CAAB. Fare ceilings on various routes are notified by the CAAB from time to time for
guidance of the airlines and the travel agents.

--- Page 11 ---
(b) No ticket for outward journey from Bangladesh should be issued by an airline/shipping
company or travel agent which do not specify the actual date of departure. If an application is
made subsequently to the airline/shipping company or travel agent to alter or amend the date of
departure they should examine such tickets with a view to determining whether any exchange
has been drawn against such tickets. Where foreign exchange has been drawn against the ticket,
no extension of date of departure should be granted without specific approval of Bangladesh
Bank in each case.
(11) Booking of inward passage

(a) Booking of inward passages against payment in Taka for persons holding Bangladesh
passports who proceeded abroad on one way tickets would require prior Bangladesh Bank
approval. Booking of inward passages against payment in Taka for foreign nationals would also
require prior Bangladesh Bank approval.
(b) Airlines/shipping companies/their travel agents may issue Prepaid Ticket Advices (PTA) in
favor of foreign guests invited by Govt./Autonomous/Semi-autonomous organizations, UN
organizations, local agencies of international organizations in Bangladesh. These PTAs may be
issued against application by the concerned organization.

(12) Sales of air tickets through international cards

Resident Bangladeshi nationals, having visas where applicable, may use their international cards
for purchase of air tickets from airlines operating in Bangladesh for travelling abroad, subject to
provisions of FE Circular No. 47, dated November 19, 2025.

(13) Refund against cancellation of tickets

(a) Refunds against cancelled/unutilized tickets/vouchers should be made only after the
passenger produces his/her passport, and after being satisfied that any foreign exchange issued
has been encashed with an AD or the entry has been duly cancelled by an AD or that the
document bears no evidence of any exchange issued to the holder. Sometimes exchange is drawn
by one passenger on behalf of a group of persons travelling together.

(b) In such cases if any member of the group cancels his/her booking, no refund of passage
money should be made unless his/her quota of exchange has been refunded to or encashed with
an AD and necessary evidence to this effect is produced to the airline/shipping company/travel
agent. This requirement of encashment of unutilized foreign exchange applies in all cases.
Refunds by the airline/shipping company/travel agent should invariably be made by cheques
drawn on the official account of the airline/shipping company/travel agent concerned with a bank
in Bangladesh. In all other cases, no refund should be granted against part or whole cancellation
of ticket unless prior approval of Bangladesh Bank is obtained.

(c) However, where a passenger once undertakes the foreign travel it should be construed that
the foreign exchange released to him/her has been utilized for the purpose for which it was

--- Page 12 ---
released. Airlines /shipping companies/travel agents may, in such cases allow refund of the cost
of the cancelled/unutilized portion of tickets without insisting on production of passport of the
passenger concerned if it is otherwise evident that the passenger undertook the foreign travel and
stayed back abroad for any reason.

(14) No refund outside Bangladesh

In all cases of bookings made against payments in Taka, whether single or round trip, no refund
should be granted outside Bangladesh. In all such cases refunds should be made only in
Bangladesh in Taka to the Bangladeshi nominee/authorized person of the passenger concerned.
All tickets/vouchers etc., must be marked accordingly. Airlines and shipping companies should
also ensure that such refunds are not given in the form of exchange vouchers or in any other
form which can be used for further transportation. All such refunds must be made either by
cheque or by actual cash payment in Bangladesh.

(15) Performance of journey from one place to another outside Bangladesh

Passages for journeys to be performed from one place out of Bangladesh to another place out of
Bangladesh i.e. for performance of journey wholly outside Bangladesh should not be booked
against Bangladesh Taka without the prior permission of the Bangladesh Bank.
(16) Adjustment of cost of passage

Airlines/shipping companies/travel agents may make adjustment upto Tk. 600(six hundred)
without prior approval of the Bangladesh Bank towards cost of passages, if the fare changes
upward or downward.

(17) Acceptance of fare difference

Airlines/shipping companies/travel agents may accept freight in local currency for the excess
baggage (accompanied or unaccompanied) only in the following cases without prior approval of
Bangladesh Bank:

(a) Freight for transportation from foreign countries to Bangladesh of accompanied as well as
unaccompanied baggage by the returning Bangladesh nationals on freight to pay basis;

(b) Freight on samples, advertisement materials and presentations imported into Bangladesh on
freight to pay basis as per provisions of IPO in force.

(18) Acceptance of freight in Taka against export samples

Airlines/shipping companies may accept freight in Bangladesh Taka from registered exporters
against dispatch of bonafide trade samples of exportable items from Bangladesh without prior
approval of Bangladesh Bank on the basis of Customs Clearance Certificate for dispatch of the

--- Page 13 ---
article. Where the value of trade sample exceeds the prescribed limit, export permit from the
Office of the CCI&E and recommendation of the EPB should also be asked for. While accepting
freight in Taka in respect of consignments of such export samples, the airlines/shipping company
will obtain a declaration from the exporter concerned to the effect that the parcel contains
bonafide trade sample without involving any payment in foreign exchange. The airlines/shipping
companies while submitting their returns to ADs will indicate the number and date of the
Customs Clearance Certificate and Export Permit from the office of the CCI&E, reference
number and date of EPB's recommendation and the registration number of the exporter
concerned with date.

(19) Reference to Bangladesh Bank

Cases of booking of passage/freight not covered in this circular may be referred to Bangladesh
Bank for instructions.

--- Page 14 ---
Part-B
Foreign exchange transactions on account of foreign airlines and shipping companies


2. Freight and passage collections
(1) Applications for remittances: Applications shall be submitted to ADs on Form TM with a
declaration in Form FP (Appendix-1), together with:
(a) Import/export freight manifest.
(b) Encashment certificate in support of inward remittances received from head office/principal
abroad.
(c) Form FF in support of freight brought by freight forwarders against FOB (or similar term)
export using Bangladesh Bank Online Inward Remittance Monitoring System (as per Enclosure-
(d) Form FF –Export Prepaid / Import Collect (generated via OEMS/OIMS) in support of freight
charges received in local currency; supporting documents retained at airline/shipping company
for inspection.
(e) Authenticated copy of charter party for vessels chartered by the principal of Bangladeshi
shipping agents.

Statements in sub-paragraphs (5) and (6) shall accompany applications, where necessary.
However, supporting documents retained by airlines/shipping companies for submission to ADs
and inspection team of Bangladesh Bank, as and when required.

(2) Remittance of freight and passage: Remittances of freights and passages collected in
Bangladesh may be sent to owners abroad after adjustment of the amount spent for local
disbursement and taxes payable. Remittance of passage collections or use thereof for local
disbursements is permissible. Surplus earnings shall be calculated on actual collections,
maintaining a minimum 10% provision for refunds of unavailed journeys; remittance is allowed
only from available funds in designated accounts.

(3) Submission of periodical statement: All foreign airlines and shipping companies are
required to submit periodical statements of their disbursement and collection in the prescribed
form regardless of whether there is a remittable surplus. The statement is required even from
those airlines and shipping companies who bring in funds from abroad to meet their operating
expenses in Bangladesh; the amounts brought in from head office/principal abroad should be
reported in the FP statement.

(4) Agency commission for handling vessels: Shipping companies/agents are required to
charge minimum agency commission for handling vessels at Bangladesh ports at the following
rates:

(a) Export on CFR or similar terms – 2.50 percent on gross freight;
(b) Export on FOB or similar terms – 5.00 percent on gross freight;

--- Page 15 ---
(c) Import on CFR or similar terms – 5.00 percent on gross freight;
(d) Import on FOB or similar terms – 2.50 percent on gross freight;

(e)(i) Import Cargoes in tramp/chartered vessel per port per call:

Amount in USD
Weight
(a) Import cargoes (dry) including
(b) Tanker/liquid cargo
bulk/homogeneous-mixed in tramp/
upto DWAT (Dead
(Tons)
chartered vessel upto DWAT(Dead
Weight All Told)
Weight All Told)
Upto 10,000
1,000
1,000
Above 10,000 but not
2,000
1,500
exceeding 20,000
Above 20,000
2,500
2,000

(ii) Minimum agency commission for tramp/chartered vessels in ballast calling at Bangladesh
ports for bunkering, victualling including landing of sick crew etc. per call per port ..... USD 750

(iii) Owner's protecting/husbanding /supervising agent's minimum fees for tramp/
chartered vessel per call per port ..................................................................................... USD 750.

(5) Submission of statements by foreign airlines: Foreign airlines are required to submit
the following statements on monthly basis:

(a) Statement of freight/passage collection and disbursement in Bangladesh (Appendix-2).

(b) System generated passage sales statement supported by bank statements.
IATA member airlines to submit IATA system generated documents-
(i) BSP airline billing summary and
(ii) BSP statement summary, including system generated counter sales and excess baggage sales
report containing full details of each transaction, and a summary statement of revenue and
expenditure as per Appendix-3

(c) Foreign airlines and non-IATA airlines to submit Appendix-4 and system generated passage
sales statement supported by bank statement
(d) Disbursement statement (Appendix-5) supported by cancellation/refund statement
(Appendix-6).
(e) Details of credit bookings of passage and freight realized in cash during the month
(Appendix-7).

--- Page 16 ---
10

(f) Details of outstanding passage/freight bookings on credit (Appendix-8).
(g) ADs shall obtain declaration from airlines/agents as per Appendix-9 and shall submit the
declaration as well as a certificate as per Appendix-10 along with monthly statements of foreign
airlines.

(6) Submission of statements by shipping companies/agents: Shipping companies/agents
operating in Bangladesh are required to submit the following statements on quarterly basis:


(a) Statement of Freight/Passage Collections by the foreign shipping companies in Bangladesh
in Form Shipping I (Appendix-11).

(b) Details of credit bookings of passage and freight realized in cash during the quarter in Form
Shipping II (Appendix-12)

(c) Details of outstanding passage and freight booking on credit in Form Shipping III (Appendix-
13).
(d) Statement of expenditure in Form IV (Appendix-14) supported by cancellations or refunds of
freight/passages in Form Shipping V (Appendix-15).

(e) Statement of passages sold/tickets issued by the shipping company passages (Appendix-16).

(f) Statement of commission and income tax in Form Shipping VI (Appendix-17).

(g) Statement of Income and Expenditure income tax in Form Shipping VII (Appendix-18).

(h) ADs shall obtain declaration from shipping companies/agents as per Appendix-9 and shall
submit the declaration as well as a certificate as per Appendix-10 along with quarterly statements
of shipping companies.

(7) The returns do not require to be accompanied by documents. Instead, shipping companies
shall retain documents such as export/import freight manifest and bill of lading, bills/vouchers at
their end (except Appendix-22) along with the quarterly statements. All collections and
expenditures of foreign shipping companies are required to be reflected in bank statements. The
returns should be submitted within 60(sixty) days following the quarter to which the returns
relate.

(8) Collection of freight for transportation of excess baggage

Shipping/airline companies or travel agents may collect freight in Taka for transportation of
excess accompanied as well as unaccompanied baggage including motor car of Bangladesh
nationals from destination abroad to Bangladesh without prior permission of Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 17 ---
11

(9) Accepting freight in Taka by shipping companies/airlines

Shipping companies/airlines while accepting freight in Bangladesh Taka on exports and imports
should be guided by the following instructions:

(a) Freight on exports: ADs shall generate "Information of freight charge on prepaid basis
against export" (to be termed as Form FF- Export Prepaid) using Bangladesh Bank Online
Export Monitoring System (OEMS) as per instructions given in the User Manual (Freight
Forwarder- Import Collect Certificate management Guideline) of ‘Documents’ tab of OEMS in
favor of concerned Exporter.

Exporter shall provide ‘Form FF- Export Prepaid’ to the concerned Freight Forwarders/ airlines
in support of freight charges received in local currency.

(b) Licensed freight forwarders may pay freight charges to airlines/shipping companies in Taka
in respect of exports made on FOB basis subject to compliance with stipulations mentioned in
Part-G of this circular.

(c) ADs shall generate “Information of freight charge against FOB (or similar term) import" (to
be termed as Form FF- Import Collect) using Bangladesh Bank Online Import Monitoring
System (OIMS) as per instructions given in the User Manual (Freight Forwarder- Import Collect
Certificate management Guideline) of ‘Documents’ tab of OIMS in favor of concerned Importer.

Importer shall provide ‘Form FF- Import Collect’ to the concerned Freight Forwarders/shipping
companies in support of freight charges received in local currency.

(d) Accepting freight on FOB imports in foreign currency by shipping companies/ airlines,
eligible freight forwarders

Shipping companies/airlines/freight forwarders may accept freight charges on FOB imports in
foreign currencies from the importers/eligible licensed freight forwarders while importers' banks
may at the request of their importer clients make payments of freight charges in foreign
exchange to airlines/shipping companies/eligible licensed freight forwarders, out of the total
value of the LCs/contracts issued for the import covering costs of goods and freight as per
relevant instructions on import trade. The receipts in foreign exchange shall be used through the
foreign currency accounts maintained by shipping companies/airlines/eligible licensed freight
forwarders under general authorization. However, payment of freight in FC shall be supported
by certificate generated from OIMS while crediting the FC account concerned which should be
enclosed with the freight manifest/return at the time of applying for remittance of surplus freight
collections.

(e) Airlines/shipping companies/ freight forwarders shall collect ‘Form FF- Export Prepaid’ or
‘Form FF- Import Collect’ from the concerned Exporter/Importer in support of freight charges

--- Page 18 ---
12

received in local currency and submit the same to the designated AD while remitting their
surplus earnings/Freight Charges to their Head Office/ Principal/Counterpart Freight Forwarder
abroad.

(f) Shipping companies/airlines shall retain documents [airway bill, bill of lading, import/export
freight manifest, Form FF, Form FF- Export Prepaid, Form FF- Import Collect specified] at their
end for further examination or other legal/regulatory requirements instead of submitting those
documents along with the monthly/quarterly statements/applications for remittance of surplus
earnings.

(10) Accepting freight on FOB exports in FC: Foreign exchange received by shipping
companies, airlines and multimodal transport operators licensed as freight forwarders by
Customs Authorities against handling of FOB export cargos from Bangladesh may be credited to
FC accounts as mentioned under general authorization. Shipping companies/ air lines may accept
freight charges on FOB exports in foreign currencies from the eligible licensed freight
forwarders in terms of instructions in this regard.

(11) Charges of demurrage, detention, handling or equivalent charges
In addition to freight collectable in Bangladesh, charges of demurrage, detention, handling or
equivalent charges being considered as taxable as per tax regulations shall be considered for
calculation of remittable surplus of foreign shipping lines/their agents working in Bangladesh
subject to deduction of taxes and commission. Accordingly the quarterly returns of foreign
shipping lines/their agents will be submitted to Bangladesh Bank incorporating these charges.
Agency commission at 5% is also applicable, irrespective of terms, for collection of revenue on
account of demurrage, detention, handling or equivalent charges

(12) Purchase of fuel/oil in foreign exchange by airlines/shipping companies or their agents
in Bangladesh

(a) ADs designated for effecting outward remittances may issue drafts in foreign exchange
favoring state owned fuel/oil selling companies. In this context, equivalent Taka is required to be
shown in the disbursement statement supported by documentary evidences. The payments by
way of RTGS in foreign exchange need to be reported in online TM Form monitoring system
and necessary relevant schedules should be reported to Statistics Department of Bangladesh
Bank.

(b) ADs receiving payment in foreign exchange may, besides encashment, retain the amounts in
margin accounts or in approved foreign currency accounts, in the name of state owned fuel/oil
selling companies, opened with permission from Bangladesh Bank. The amounts so retained
shall only be used for settlement of import payments in addition to encashment in Taka. The

--- Page 19 ---
13

receipts in foreign exchange need to be reported in respective online reporting module and
necessary relevant schedules should be reported to Statistics Department of Bangladesh Bank.

3. Remittance of surplus earnings of foreign airlines and shipping companies

Apart from the periodical statements referred to in the foregoing paragraph, applications for
remittance of surplus earnings of foreign airlines and shipping companies in form TM submitted
to ADs should be accompanied by the following documents:

(1) Airlines

(a) Encashment Certificate as per Appendix-19, certificate of debit to convertible Taka account
as per Appendix-20 and certificate of debit to shipping agent's/ company's account as per
Appendix-21 as applicable, Form FF - instead of encashment certificate - generated from ‘User
Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring System’ as per Enclosur-1.

(b) Reports in the case of excess baggage, export cargo etc. If freight against export from
Bangladesh is accepted in local currency, certificate from exporter's bank as per paragraph
2(9)(a) above.

(c) In the case of payment of freight in taka on import, certificate from the concerned ADs as per
paragraph 2(9)(c) above;

(d) In the case of issue of tickets against convertible Taka Accounts, letter of authorization from
the concerned account-holder.

(e) Each form will be submitted by the airline/its GSA to ADs in duplicate. Airlines shall no
longer be required to submit copies of documents including airway bill, import/export freight
manifest, Form FF, Form FF- Export Prepaid, Form FF- Import Collect, excepting bank
statements, documents against payment of different types of applicable taxes such as FATT,
excise duty, embarkation fee, TDS and so on, in support of disbursements. Instead, they shall
retain the documents at their end for submission to ADs and inspection team of Bangladesh
Bank, as and when required.

A. Examination and processing by ADs

(a) From the above mentioned documents the ADs shall satisfy themselves that the concerned
airlines have collected passenger fare/cargo freight as per routes and fares approved by the Civil
Aviation Authority of Bangladesh (CAAB). Moreover, the ADs have to satisfy themselves that
the provisions of this circular and other instructions relating to issuance of tickets and collection
of freight have been duly complied with. All statements/returns/documents submitted to the
Bangladesh Bank must show the following at actual:

--- Page 20 ---
14


(i) fare realized from passengers
(ii) freight against cargo
(iii) number of passengers
(iv) number of cargo challans
(v) expenses incurred under different heads

(b) This is to mention here that only actual fare realized from passengers and actual freight
realized against cargo shall be considered to determine remittable surplus to abroad in
compliance with instructions stated in paragraph 2(2) of this circular.

(c) To ascertain the expenses of the airlines, ADs shall examine the statements submitted by the
airlines in terms of aforementioned paragraph 1(5). Bills/vouchers issued by the relevant
authorities submitted by the airlines in support of the expenses shown in Appendix-5 should be
examined and written explanation should be obtained in case of major omissions (e.g. landing
charge in case of on line carrier) in the statement. If the explanation is not found satisfactory, the
matter should be brought to the notice of Bangladesh Bank immediately.

(d) While determining surplus earnings, the concerned ADs shall satisfy themselves that the
agency commission, overriding commission (in the case of issue of tickets and collection of
freight by the GSA) as per IATA rules, accrued expenses, refunds and income tax paid/payable
have been adjusted and a minimum 10% provision has been maintained for refunds of unavailed
journeys. Unused portion of the provision so maintained may be added back in the following
periods.

(e) Taxes may not be deducted to the extent exempted by Bilateral Treaties providing for tax
exemption or where bank guarantees are furnished as per approval of the tax authorities. Airlines
may pay taxes out of funds earlier earmarked for tax on the basis of assessment made by the tax
authorities or from their current income. In the latter case, the taxes paid should be shown as an
item of expenditure in the disbursement statement of the month in which the taxes have been
paid. If expenditure in any month exceeds income, the deficit must be covered by inward
remittance.

(f) After determining the surplus earning as per relevant provisions of this circular. ADs will
approve form TM and remit surplus earnings to the head office of the applicant airline.
Remittance is, however, to be allowed out of the fund available, without borrowed one, in the
designated bank account. Thereafter, within fifteen days of the following month of effecting
remittance, the ADs shall submit to the Bangladesh Bank one set of statements.

(2) Shipping companies

(a) Encashment certificate in support of remittance from abroad by head office/principal;

--- Page 21 ---
15

(b) In the case of arrival in Bangladesh ports of vessel chartered by the foreign principal of
Bangladeshi shipping agent, attested copy of the relevant charter party;

(c) In the case of export cargo, statement regarding tax liability in prescribed form (Appendix-
22) duly signed by the taxation and customs authorities. The shipping company/its agent shall
prepare this statement in quadruplicate and submit it to the tax authorities. The concerned
Deputy Commissioner of Taxes will put his signature and seal on those and return three copies to
the concerned shipping company or his agent. The shipping company/agent will submit those 3
(three) copies to the concerned office of the customs authorities who will put signatures and seal
alongwith name and full address on those and return two copies to the shipping company/agent
who will submit these to ADs. The authorized officer of ADs will put his signature and seal
mentioning name and address on both copies, retain one copy and return the other to the
shipping company/agent;

(d) Forms as per paragraph (6) and (9) above.

(e) Each form will be submitted by shipping companies to ADs in duplicate. Shipping
companies shall retain bill of lading, import/export freight manifest, Form FF, Form FF- Export
Prepaid, Form FF- Import Collect, excepting bank statements, documents against payment of
different types of applicable taxes such as FATT, excise duty, embarkation fee, TDS and so on,
in support of disbursements. Instead, they shall retain the documents at their end for submission
to ADs and inspection team of Bangladesh Bank, as and when required.

A. Examination and Processing by ADs

(a) In determining total income, freight received against export on CFR/CIF/CPT/CIP basis,
freight received against import on FOB basis and fund received by way of inward remittance
from head office/principal of local shipping agent are to be added. The surplus earning is to be
determined by deducting expenses shown in Appendix-14 from the total income. Expenses
relating to port charges and custom charges as per disbursement statement (Appendix-14) are to
be checked with the bills issued by the concerned port authority. ADs shall satisfy themselves
that freight brokerages have been reflected in Appendix-14.

(b) In the case of export of non-jute and non-traditional goods (including export of jute yarn and
jute carpet by private sector jute mills and jute carpet manufacturers) 0.50(half) percent of total
income is payable to Bangladesh Shippers' Council as freight brokerage on account of service
charge. This freight brokerage is also required to be shown in the disbursement statement as an
expense. ADs shall also ensure that agency fees and commission as per paragraph 2(4) above
have been shown at relevant field of Disbursement Statement as per Appendix-14. Taxes shown
in Disbursement Statement should be checked with particulars furnished for determination of tax
liability as per Appendix-22. Since income tax on account of Feeder Freight is not shown in the

--- Page 22 ---
16

Appendix referred to above, remittance of surplus earnings may be allowed only on receipt of
supporting document to the effect that income tax has been paid on this account. Any advance
payment made to the Master of the ship, payment towards bunker supply, expenses incurred in
connection with hotel bill or charter hire should also be shown separately in the Disbursement
Statement. For each item of expense amounting to Tk. 2,500(two thousand five hundred) and
above, the relevant bills should be checked. In each case of remittance of surplus earnings, the
ADs should obtain a certificate from the shipping company/agent that all the expenses have been
shown in the disbursement statement, and that omission of any expense from the said statement
shall render the applicant liable for action against violation of Foreign Exchange Regulations.
The AD shall approve the form TM for the amount of surplus earnings found in order and after
effecting remittance forward one full set of the papers alongwith approved form TM to the
concerned area office of Bangladesh Bank within 15(fifteen) days of the following month of
such remittance for post facto examination.

4. Undertakings for adjustment/repatriation of excess amount

In all cases of remittances of surplus earnings, undertakings shall be obtained from the applicants
to the effect that in the event of detection, on post facto scrutiny, of any excess remittance, the
excess amount will be repatriated/adjusted from subsequent remittable amount.

5. Submission of returns to Bangladesh Bank

All the above mentioned remittances shall be reported in the usual periodic submitted by ADs to
the Bangladesh Bank. Besides, all receipt and payment transactions through foreign currency
accounts shall have to be included in the monthly collection and disbursement statements
routinely submitted to Bangladesh Bank by shipping companies/airlines through their AD banks.
In this context, collection in foreign currency should be presented in a separate column of
relevant statements.

--- Page 23 ---
17

Part-C
Foreign exchange transactions of
Bangladesh Shipping Corporation and Bangladesh Biman

6. Operating expenses of Bangladesh Shipping Corporation and Bangladesh Biman

(1) Bangladesh Shipping Corporation and Bangladesh Biman are allowed to make remittances to
meet bonafide disbursements in foreign ports/foreign stations without prior approval of the
Bangladesh Bank.

(2) Submission of Statement
Bangladesh Shipping Corporation is required to submit the following periodical
statements/returns in regard to their foreign operations:
(a) Consolidated quarterly statement showing income and expenditure in respect of foreign
shipping agents as per Appendix-23.
(b) Consolidated quarterly statement showing income and expenditure in foreign exchange by
foreign agents as per Appendix-24.
(c) Consolidated quarterly statement showing balances held abroad with banks, main agents and
other credit agencies as per Appendix-25.
(d) A copy of the monthly report of cash foreign exchange earnings and expenditure submitted to
Ministry of Finance.
(e) Returns as at (i) to (iii) above should reach Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka within two
months following the quarter to which returns relate and returns at (iv) above by 20th of the
following month.

(3) Submission of Statement Bangladesh Biman

Bangladesh Biman is required to submit a consolidated monthly statement of foreign exchange
earnings and expenditure as per Appendix-26.

--- Page 24 ---
18

Part-D
Statements of private shipping companies and airlines

7. Statements/returns to be submitted by private shipping companies

All private shipping companies in Bangladesh are required to submit the following quarterly
statements/returns:
(a) Statement of earnings and expenditure in Bangladesh in respect of vessels owned by private
shipping companies as per Appendix-27.
(b) Statement showing earnings and expenditure of foreign agents of Bangladeshi shipping
companies as per Appendix-28.
(c) Consolidated statement of earnings, disbursements and net amount repatriated to Bangladesh
as per Appendix-29.
(d) Statement showing debits and credits to foreign currency account maintained by shipping
companies with banks abroad as per Appendix 30.

The statements should reach Foreign Exchange Operation Department-2 (FEOD-2), Bangladesh
Bank, Head Office, Dhaka or concerned area office of Bangladesh Bank within two months
following the quarter to which those relate.

8. Submission of statement by Bangladeshi private airlines operating in international
routes.

(1) Bangladeshi private airlines operating in international route shall submit monthly statements
as per Appendix-31, 32, 33 and 34 attached herewith to FEOD-2 of Head Office/concerned area
office of Bangladesh Bank within 15 days of the following month.

(2) Bangladeshi private airlines can make disbursement in respect of bonafide transactions only
out of their receipts at foreign ports and they are under the obligation of regular repatriation of
the excess collection if any. They should make an application to FEOD-2, Head Office,
Motijheel, Dhaka/concerned area office of Bangladesh Bank for remittance of the deficit or for
meeting bonafide items of the disbursement. They are also instructed to comply with the
instructions for booking of passage/freight.

(3) The Statements should be submitted through one nominated AD bank branch only. Prior
approval from Bangladesh Bank is not required for changing the nominated AD. However a
statement certified by the existing nominated AD with regard to remittances made up to date is
to be forwarded to the proposed new nominated AD.

--- Page 25 ---
19

9. Submission of statement by Bangladeshi shipping companies/airlines renting their
ships/containers/aircrafts

(1) Bangladeshi shipping companies and airlines renting their ships/containers/aircrafts to
operators abroad shall submit quarterly statement as per Appendix-35 through their respective
AD banks to FEOD-2, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka or relevant area offices of
Bangladesh Bank within 60 days following the quarter to which those relate.

(2) The aforementioned quarterly statement needs to be submitted through one nominated AD
bank branch only. Prior approval from Bangladesh Bank is not required for changing the
nominated AD bank. However NOC (No objection certificate) from the existing AD bank is
required to be forwarded to the proposed new nominated AD bank.

--- Page 26 ---
20

Part-E
Foreign exchange transactions for charter aircraft and ships

10. Charter of foreign aircraft

(1) Persons or firms holding permission of the appropriate ministry of the Government to charter
non-resident-owned aircraft may apply for remittance approval of Bangladesh Bank in form TM
alongwith the permission letter of the Govt. The application should be accompanied by a copy of
the charter agreement together with an undertaking that a detailed account of all disbursements
made for the account of the owners will be submitted to Bangladesh Bank within 15(fifteen)
days of the expiry of the period of the agreement.

(2) If the application is approved, a permit will be issued to cover any advance payments
required under the terms of the Charter but the remittance of the total amount agreed upon will
not normally be sanctioned until the final accounting of disbursements etc. is made available to
Bangladesh Bank.

11. Charter of foreign ships

(1) Persons or firms resident in Bangladesh intending to remit foreign exchange in favor of non-
resident owners of ships on account of charter hire shall apply to ADs. The documents to be
furnished alongwith the application are :

(a) Form TM duly filled in;
(b) Permission from the Ministry of Shipping/Directorate General of Ports and Shipping for
charter of the concerned non-resident owned ship;
(c) Waiver certificate from the D.G., Ports & Shipping;
(d) Contract (Charter party/Agreement) between the ship owner and the charterer;
(e) Contract between the exporter and the charterer (where the exporter is not the charterer
himself);
(f) Freight prepaid bill of lading;
(g) Bank certificate in support of CPT/CFR/CIF/CIP export as per proforma prescribed vide
paragraph 9(8)(a) above;
(h) Freight/cargo manifest issued by the Shipping Agent;
(i) Mate's receipt issued by the Captain/Master of the concerned ship;

(2) If the above documents are found in order, the total quantity of goods shipped shall be
determined from the concerned bills of lading, cargo/freight manifest and Mate's receipt.
Thereafter, the total freight shall be determined by applying the rate of freight mentioned in the
charter party (agreement concluded between the ship-owner and the charterer) to the aforesaid
quantity of goods. To be certain that the goods shipped have been exported on

--- Page 27 ---
21

CFR/CPT/CIF/CIP basis, it would be necessary to examine certificates issued by the concerned
banks. Net charter freight is required to be determined by deducting freight tax at prescribed rate,
freight brokerage, port dues etc. and other local expenses relating to the chartered ship from the
total freight. In the event of remittance of foreign exchange by the concerned non-resident ship
owner for the purpose of said local expenses, net remittable charter freight shall be determined
by adjustment of the amount so remitted from abroad. After determination of net charter hire on
the basis of the above procedure, ADs shall approve the form TM and effect remittance to the
non-resident owner. Before allowing remittance of charter hire, ADs shall obtain from the
charterer an undertaking that the charterer shall submit to ADs the final Income-Expenditure
Statement alongwith required documentary evidences within one month from the date of
remittance of charter hire.

(3) Further, an undertaking is to be obtained from the charterer to the effect that if on subsequent
scrutiny the remittance is seen to be in excess of amount actually payable, the excess amount
will be repatriated through normal banking channel.

(4) In case the charterer is a private Bangladeshi shipping company, ADs, before effecting
remittance, shall satisfy itself that the concerned shipping company has no surplus earnings
abroad or the surplus earnings kept abroad is not sufficient to meet the concerned charter hire.

(5) Income-Expenditure statement of the chartered foreign ship company

The charterer shall submit to concerned ADs a final Income- Expenditure Statement relating to
the charter alongwith documentary evidences within one month from the date of approval of the
remittance. Each of the above documents/statements and related papers shall be obtained in
duplicate and one set of the same alongwith approved form TM shall be sent by ADs to the
relevant area office of the Bangladesh Bank, for post-facto examination.

12. Import through chartered ship: payment of freight charges to ship-owner abroad

To effect payment of freight charges to foreign ship-owners for ships chartered by the importers
in Bangladesh, ADs shall have to observe the following conditions to remit such charges:
(a) the relevant Bill of Entry has been submitted as proof that the goods have been arrived in the
country;
(b) ADs should satisfy themselves that the unit value of the imported goods including freight is
competitive with the value of such goods imported on CFR basis in the respective period;
(c) Import Policy Order in force has been meticulously complied with;
(d) authorization from the Directorate of Shipping has been obtained (if general waiver has not
been accorded);
(e) Form TM is duly filled in.

--- Page 28 ---
22

Part-F
Remittance on account of courier services and railway companies

13 Courier services

(1) Foreign courier service companies/their local agents operating in Bangladesh shall submit
monthly statements as per Attachment-1 (CS) to their respective ADs along with Annexure-A
(CS) and other supporting documents as mentioned therein for remitting the surplus earnings to
their Head Office/Principal abroad. The monthly statement, certified by a registered chartered
accountant and its supporting documents should contain information relating to each collection
in Bangladesh against outward despatches; volume/weight of the documents/parcels despatched,
mode of despatch, office abroad (with name of city and country) through which
documents/parcels have been delivered, amount of commission and the amount payable to the
principal on account of charges. The surplus earnings shall be determined by deducting from
gross collections (i) the local agent's commission for handling inward and outward
documents/parcels (ii) taxes payable on gross collections as applicable and (iii) audit fees and
other expenses. Remittance applications should also be accompanied by invoices raised by head
office/principal abroad for the claimed amount.

(2) ADs shall examine the submitted documents meticulously while ascertaining surplus
earnings. They shall also make sure that due VAT and income taxes are paid complying the
VAT and income tax act. After ascertaining the surplus earnings, ADs shall approve form TM
and remit surplus earnings to concerned Head office/Principal abroad. After effecting remittance,
the ADs shall forward one full set of all papers including copy of approved form TM to the
concerned Head Office/Branch office of Bangladesh Bank for post-facto examination within
15(fifteen) days of the following month.

(3) Courier service companies that operate on behalf of their foreign principal on Free Delivery
basis and do not remit surplus earnings to their Head office/Principal abroad, are instructed to
submit quarterly statements as per Attachment-2 (CS) to Bangladesh Bank through their
respective AD's along with Annexure-B (CS) and other supporting documents mentioned
therein.

(4) Besides submission of Monthly/Quarterly statement, courier service agents are instructed to
submit Annual Audited Financial Statement through their ADs.

14. Railway Companies: Remittance of surplus earnings of foreign railway company by
local agent.
ADs may effect remittance of surplus earnings on behalf of local agents of foreign railway
companies to their principals abroad. Local agents operating with the authorization/license of
competent government bodies shall submit to the ADs monthly statements for the purpose of

--- Page 29 ---
23

remittance of surplus earnings to foreign principals. The monthly statement, certified by a
registered chartered accountant and its supporting documents should contain information relating
to each collection in Bangladesh against sales of ticket, amount of commission and the amount
payable to the principal abroad. The surplus earnings shall be determined by deducting from
gross collections (i) the local agent's commission (ii) taxes payable on gross collections as
applicable and (iii) audit fees and other expenses. Remittance applications should also be
accompanied by invoices raised by principal abroad for the claimed amount. After recoding
approval in form TM and effecting remittance, the AD shall forward one full set of all relevant
papers to FEOD-2, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka for post-facto examination within 15
days of the following month of effecting remittance. In addition to this, AD shall report the
transactions to FEOD-2, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office/the concerned area office of Bangladesh
Bank in the monthly returns/statements.

15. Undertakings for adjustment/repatriation of excess amount

In all cases of remittances of surplus earnings, undertakings shall be obtained from the applicants
to the effect that in the event of detection, on post facto scrutiny, of any excess remittance, the
excess amount will be repatriated/ adjusted from subsequent remittable amount.

--- Page 30 ---
24

Part-G
Foreign exchange transactions of freight forwarders

16. Instructions for multimodal transportation agencies: Multimodal transport agencies
named as freight forwarders licensed by Customs Authorities will adhere to the following
instructions in addition to the provisions of Part-B and operations of foreign currency accounts:

(a) Licensed freight forwarders may pay freight charges to airlines/shipping companies in Taka
in respect of exports made on FOB basis subject to observance of the following terms and
conditions:

(i) Freight forwarders will provide encashment certificates (Form FF) generated by designated
AD bank of the concerned freight forwarder in accordance with ‘User Manual for Inward
Remittance Monitoring System’ as per Enclosur-1 to airlines/shipping companies in support of
freight charges recovered from the overseas importer through their counterpart freight
forwarders abroad and repatriated the same to Bangladesh through normal banking channel.

(ii) Freight Forwarders shall collect ‘Form FF- Export Prepaid’ or ‘Form FF- Import Collect’
from the concerned Exporter/Importer in support of freight charges received in local currency
and submit the same to the designated AD while remitting their surplus earnings/Freight Charges
to their counterpart freight forwarder abroad.

(iii) Transactions of a licensed freight forwarder shall be channeled through one AD bank branch
designated by it. In case of changing AD bank, the relevant file of licensed freight forwarder
shall be transferred direct to new AD bank branch with immediate intimation to FEOD-2, Head
office or other concerned offices of Bangladesh Bank.

(b) ADs may, in addition to charges against imports on FOB basis, effect outward remittance on
account of profit share/service charges payable to counterpart freight forwarders.

(c) Licensed freight forwarders shall arrange with their foreign counterpart freight forwarders to
receive their receivables in such a manner so as to match the credit line extended to them by
airlines/shipping companies locally. The same arrangement shall be made with importers for
settlement of charges with counterpart freight forwarders against FOB imports.

(d) Freight forwarders shall, through their designated ADs, report (as per Appendices-36, 37 &
38) their transactions to FEOD-2, head office/respective area office of Bangladesh Bank by 20th
day at the close of the month.

--- Page 31 ---
25

Part-H
Foreign currency accounts of shipping companies, airlines and freight forwarders

17. Foreign currency accounts of shipping companies, airlines and freight forwarders:
Shipping companies/airlines/licensed freight forwarders handling FOB export cargo from
Bangladesh receive payments in foreign currency in settlement of costs incurred by them locally
towards internal transportation, sea freight/air freight, and related other handling charges.
Likewise they have to pay abroad in foreign currency for similar costs and charges incurred on
FOB imports into Bangladesh.

The foreign currency accounts so opened may be credited with online ticket sale proceeds
received through international cards, in accordance with FE Circular No. 47 dated November 19,
2025.

18. To facilitate these payments in foreign currency for handling of FOB imports from their
receipts in foreign currency against handling of FOB exports, shipping companies, airlines and
multimodal transport operators licenced as freight forwarders by Customs Authorities can open
and maintain accounts in USD or other freely convertible currencies with ADs in Bangladesh.

19. Eligible transactions through these foreign currency accounts: Eligible transactions
through these accounts and other requirements for opening and maintaining of such accounts are
enumerated below:
Eligible credits to these accounts:

(a) Accepting freight on FOB exports in FC: Foreign exchange received by shipping companies,
airlines and multimodal transport operators licensed as freight forwarders by Customs
Authorities against their handling of FOB export cargos from Bangladesh may be credited to
such accounts as mentioned in paragraph 2(10) of this circular. Shipping companies/airlines may
accept freight charges on FOB exports in foreign currencies from the eligible licensed freight
forwarders. In these cases, shipping companies/airlines should ask the licensed freight
forwarders to make payments in foreign currency from the foreign currency accounts maintained
with their nominated ADs.

(b) Accepting freight on FOB imports in FC: Shipping companies/airlines may accept freight
charges on FOB imports in foreign currencies from the importers/eligible licensed freight
forwarders [paragraph 2(9)]. In this process importers' banks may at the request of their importer
clients make payments of freight charges in foreign exchange to airlines/shipping
companies/eligible licensed freight forwarders. The receipts in foreign exchange will be used
through the foreign currency accounts maintained by shipping companies/airlines/eligible

--- Page 32 ---
26

licensed freight forwarders. ADs issue a certificate as per FF- Import Collect. This is to mention
here that, ADs shall not credit the FC Account of the concerned shipping company/airline/
Freight Forwarder in Bangladesh without producing this certificate in case of receiving freight in
FC against FOB imports.

20. Eligible debits from accounts Balances of such foreign currency accounts may be debited for
the following purposes:

(a) Encashment to Bangladesh Taka for meeting local expenses;

(b) Foreign currency payable abroad towards costs and charges relating to handling of FOB
imports into Bangladesh;

(c) Foreign currency deposited in foreign currency accounts of shipping companies/airlines may
be used for outward remittances on account of surplus earnings.

21. Balances held in foreign currency accounts shall first be used for outward remittances before
use of local currency fund. However, AD Banks shall get themselves ensured of the encashment
of adequate foreign currency by the shipping companies/airlines to meet local expenses in case
of shortfall in local currency funds and submit the encashment certificates with the statements.

22. Reporting: (1) AD banks will inform FEOD-2, head office or concerned office of
Bangladesh Bank immediately (by the next business day) as and when each such foreign
currency account is opened.

(2) All receipts and payments transactions through these accounts will have to be included in the
monthly collection and disbursement statements routinely submitted to Bangladesh Bank by
shipping companies/airlines through their AD banks. In this context, collection in foreign
currency should be presented in a separate column of relevant statements.

(3) Transaction statements of these foreign currency accounts will also have to be submitted to
Bangladesh Bank (FEOD-2, Head Office or concerned office of Bangladesh Bank) on quarterly
basis for post facto checking to satisfy that reasonable amount from the foreign currency
accounts have been encashed to Taka towards defraying of local costs and tax liabilities.
Besides, eligible licensed freight forwarders shall, through AD banks, submit monthly statements
as per Part-G to FEOD-2/concerned office of Bangladesh.

--- Page 33 ---
27

Part-I
Foreign currency accounts in the names of Bangladeshi shipping companies and airlines

23. Opening and operations of foreign currency accounts in the names of Bangladeshi
shipping companies and airlines: ADs may open FC accounts in the names of Bangladeshi
shipping companies and airlines such companies having global operations. The operational
modalities in this regard are as follows:

(a) Credit: Up to 75 percent of inward remittances with encashment of the remainder;

(b) Debit: Outward remittances on account of bonafide disbursements abroad in connection with
the management of ships/aircrafts.

24. ADs may also open FC accounts in the names of Bangladeshi shipping companies and
airlines renting ships/containers/aircrafts to operators abroad. FC accounts so opened can be
credited by 50 percent of inward remittances with encashment of the remainder. The balances
held in the accounts can be used to meet bonafide expenditures abroad pertaining to relative
ships/containers/aircrafts.

25. ADs shall observe due diligence with regards to KYC, AML/CFT standards, regulations for
taxes, and without limiting to documentary evidences for relevant transactions and reporting
routine to Bangladesh Bank including submission of periodical statements as per Part-C and D.

--- Page 34 ---
28

Part-J
Guidelines for tour operators

26. To expand the tourism industry of Bangladesh and to facilitate foreign tourists visiting
Bangladesh, the member tour operating firms of TOAB shall observe the following terms and
conditions in the context of foreign exchange transactions:

(a) Outgoing Bangladeshi nationals may purchase tour package from TOAB member firms with
an amount of up to 90(ninety) percent of his/her annual travel entitlement in foreign currency.

(b) The firm shall issue invoice to the intending traveler in foreign currency for the price of the
tour package. The traveler, in turn, will arrange payment in equivalent Taka through the
designated AD. AD shall endorse the passport of the traveler in equivalent foreign currency
mentioning that endorsement is done from annual travel quota for purchasing tour package
against invoice issued by the tour operator. Afterwards, the AD will transfer the equivalent
foreign currency to the FC account of the firm using the exchange rate of the same day and
intimate the transaction to the firm.

(c) AD may release balance of travel entitlement (travel entitlement less tour package value) to
the traveler and endorse the same in the passport in compliance with the instructions stipulated in
Para 1 of this Chapter.

(d) Issue of foreign exchange mentioned in paragraph (b) and (c) above shall have to be reported
to the Online Foreign Exchange Transaction Monitoring System of Bangladesh Bank.

(e) In no cases, foreign exchange exceeding 90 (ninety) percent of travel entitlement will be
endorsed for purchasing tour package in spite of value of tour package exceeds the limit.

(f) For effecting outward remittance on account of outbound package against concerned invoices,
tour operators shall submit necessary documents to ADs on monthly basis. Afterwards, ADs may
effect remittance on behalf of the tour operating firms on examination of relevant documents and
recording on form TM. Of the total value of tour package, up to 90(ninety) percent may be
remitted abroad, minimum 7.5(seven and a half) percent shall be encashed in Taka and the rest
2.5 (two and a half) percent may be retained in FC accounts for utilisation in business travel
abroad by the tour operators. ADs shall ensure deduction of applicable tax/VAT and payment
thereof. On effecting remittance, ADs shall send the relevant documents to FEOD-2, Bangladesh
Bank, Head Office/area office of Bangladesh Bank for post facto checking.

(g) The tour operators shall have to operate inbound tour packages to attract foreign tourists.
Inward tour packages must be at least 25(twenty five) percent of total packages sold.

--- Page 35 ---
29

(h) In case of cancellation of outbound package tour, tour operators shall arrange refund of the
payment through encashment of foreign currency in taka and cancellation of endorsement made
earlier in passport. Refund may also be freely remittable to foreign citizens in case of
cancellation of inbound package tour for which payment has been received in advance.

(i) ADs may deposit foreign exchange received in advance from foreign tourists for purchasing
of inbound packages in the FC accounts of tour operators. Besides, foreign tourists may make
payment through international credit cards provided ADs are working as acquiring banks under
merchant agreement with tour operators. Foreign currency paid by the inbound foreign tourists
shall be credited to the foreign currency accounts of the tour operators. The tour operators shall
meet local expenses such as hotel/restaurant bills in Taka through encashment of the balance of
FC accounts. Up to 90(ninety) percent of the foreign currency received from foreign tourists
shall be encashed into Taka.

(j) ADs shall not issue any bank guarantee in favor of foreign tour operator or airline on account
of sales of tour package by tour operators.

(k) ADs shall submit the statements of FC accounts and statements of tour packages sold along
with photo copy of endorsement on passports of tourists, invoices issued by tour operators,
supporting documents relating to rent of hotels and other relevant documents to FEOD-2,
Bangladesh Bank, Head Office/other office of Bangladesh Bank on monthly basis.

(l) The tour operators shall apply to FEPD, Bangladesh Bank through ADs for opening FC
accounts with certificate issued by TOAB mentioning that the applicants are their member firms.

(m) Transactions of such FC Accounts shall have to be reported to the SFCAMS, operated by
Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 36 ---
30

Part-K
Foreign exchange transactions for agency services

27. Instructions for foreign exchange transactions for agency services: Resident
persons/firms can work as agents on behalf of foreign principals without prior permission from
Bangladesh Bank. Similarly, no permission is required for encashment of inward remittances
repatriated favoring local agents on account of commission, remuneration, fee, service charges,
etc. Designated ADs, while conducting foreign exchange transactions on behalf of their agent-
customers, shall adhere to following instructions:

(a) ADs shall maintain customer-wise files with updated agency agreements and copies of
licenses/permissions, if applicable, issued by the competent authorities.

(b) ADs shall be satisfied that agents have necessary arrangements with foreign principals to
repatriate their monthly payments. In case of commission, remuneration, fee, service charges,
etc. to be receivable by agents on transaction basis as per agreements, the payment shall be
repatriated immediately on its closure between foreign principals and concerned persons/firms in
Bangladesh.

(c) ADs shall observe relevant other regulations such as AML/CFT standards, taxes, etc. for
executing foreign exchange transactions.

28. Foreign exchange transactions on account of agents working in Bangladesh on behalf of
foreign shipping companies, airlines, stock brokerage firms, courier services, railway companies,
satellite channel distributors, tour operators, freight forwarders shall be guided by the relevant
provisions of foreign exchange regulations.

--- Page 37 ---
31

Part-L
Foreign exchange transactions for liaison offices, representative offices
and other places of business under Section 18B(1) of FER Act, 1947


29. Instructions for offices established in Bangladesh Section 18B(1) of FER Act, 1947: In
terms of section 18B(1) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation (FER) Act 1947 ( VII of 1947),
amended up to September 09, 2015, person resident outside Bangladesh (whether or not a citizen
of Bangladesh) or a person who is not a citizen of, but resident in Bangladesh or a company
(other than a banking company) not incorporated under any law for the time being in force in
Bangladesh shall report to Bangladesh Bank within 30(thirty) days of obtaining permission from
Bangladesh Investment Development Authority (BIDA) or similar competent authority in
Bangladesh to establish in Bangladesh a branch office or liaison office or representative office or
any other place of business for carrying on any activity of a trading commercial or industrial
nature. Accordingly, ADs nominated by branch office or liaison office or representative office or
any other place of business in Bangladesh established under 18B(1) of the FER Act, 1947, shall
observe the following instructions with regards to dealing with such offices:

(a) Nominated ADs shall prepare and maintain a list of their clients of branch, representative,
liaison offices, etc.

(b) Permission from BIDA or similar competent authority for setting up branch/representative/
liaison offices etc. shall have to be reported within 30(thirty) days of obtaining such permission
to Foreign Exchange Investment Department (FEID), Bangladesh Bank, Head Office with copy
to FEOD-2, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office or other offices of Bangladesh Bank (in applicable
cases) through the designated ADs of the concerned office with other necessary documents
including encashment certificate, etc. Moreover, renewals of permissions (if any) shall have to
be reported to the above mentioned departments/offices of Bangladesh Bank within same time
period including of those offices who have already obtained similar permission from Bangladesh
Bank or BIDA.

(c) In case of change of nominated ADs, branch, representative, liaison offices, etc. shall collect
a no objection certificate from the current nominated bank for onward submission to new
nominated bank. Information related to change of nominated bank shall have to be intimated to
FEID, FEOD-2 and concerned office (in applicable case) of Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 38 ---
See

Paragraph 2(1) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix


FORM FP

FORM OF DECLARATION TO BE FURNISHED BY SHIPPING/AIRLINE CO./AGENT
WHEN APPLYING FOR REMITTANCE OF SURPLUS FREIGHT AND PASSAGE
MONEY DUE TO FOREIGN OWNERS OR OPERATORS

Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.

Remittance of
A/C S.S/ Airline
to M/s
(Amount)
of
(Ship owners or operators)
(Address)
We
agent for the above vessel certify that the above sum
(Full name of Agent)


represents freight and passage money earned by this vessel/Airline less our commission, expenses and all
disbursement made by us on account..............................................................................................................


as per statement given below and this sum is now due to be paid to them, they being the owners/operators of
the vessel/Airline. We further confirm that the regulations prescribed by the Bangladesh Bank have been fully
complied with in collecting the freight and passage money. We further confirm that the amount applied for,
will be remitted out of the funds held to the credit of the said principal without recourse to any loan/overdraft.

1. Balance brought forward

2. Passage and Freight collections:

a) Freight on Export (As per statement in Form shipping I enclosed)


b) Freight on Import (
- do)

c) Passage collections (
- do)


3. Booking of passages and freight on

credit realised during the month as per details enclosed


4. Inward remittances received, if any,

as per Bank encashment certificate enclosed


Total (1+2+3+4) above

Less:

5. Outstanding Export/Import/Passage
bookings on credit as per detailed

statement enclosed


6. Disbursements made as per

disbursement statement enclosed


7. Remittances allowed by the AD


8. Total (5+6+7) above


Net Remittable/receivable


Amount applied for remittance


Balance carried over


Signature and Stamp of the Shipping
Co./Airline/Agent
Date : ....................................

--- Page 39 ---
STATEMENT OF FREIGHT /PASSAGE COLLECTION AND DISBURSEMENT IN
BANGLADESH FOR THE MONTH OF…………………………….


SI.No.
Particulars
Amount in
Taka
Passage and Freight Collection:
(a) Export from Bangladesh as per freight manifest enclosed



(b) Import into Bangladesh as per freight manifest enclosed



(c) Passage collection as per passage statement enclosed



Inward remittances received, if any, as per Bank encashment
certificate enclosed



Total (1+2 above)



Less:
Disbursements made as per disbursement (statement enclosed)







Amount remittable



Amount applied for remittance







Date ..................................
Signature and Stamp of the
Airline /Agent.
See Paragraph 2(5) (a) of FEPD-1 Circular no. 8/2026
Appendix 2

--- Page 40 ---
Statement of revenue/collection and expenditure For the month of
Name of the airlines











Particulars
Amount
Total Amount
Cargo sales
Sales through CASS, if any
1st fortnight
2nd fortnight
Total
Direct/GSA sales
Total
Total cargo revenue
Passenger sales
Sales through BSP
1st fortnight
2nd fortnight
Total
Direct/GSA sales
1st fortnight
2nd fortnight
Total
Total passenger revenue
Other miscellaneous collection (if any)
Total miscellaneous collection (if any)
Inward remittances during the month
Total revenue including inward remittances (A)
Expenditure
Disbursements
Other Adjustments (if any)
Total Expenditure (B)
Provision for refund @ .. %
Less/Add: Unused/short provision of earlier period
Net Provision (C)
Amount available for remittance (A-B-C)
Less: Other adjustments (if any)
Amount remittable
Amount applied for remittance
Balance carried forward
Declaration by airlines
We do hereby declare that the statement furnished above is a complete and factually correct statement pertaining to operations
during the month of ……………. During the reporting month, we have remitted ........... (amount in foreign currency) for
which necessary payment of applicable taxes of Tk........ for ……, ….., ….. and ……. have been deducted/paid. We do
undertake to be held responsible for false statement/declaration, if detected, under FER Act, 1947.

Signature:
Name of designated official of airlines/authorized agent:
Designation:
Date:
See
Paragraph 2(5) (b) of FEPD-1 Circular no. 8/2026
Appendix
Figure in Taka

--- Page 41 ---
See

Paragraph 2(5)(c) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix


Statement of Freight Collections by the foreign airlines for the month of……………..
Name of the foreign airline………………………………………
Name and Address of the agent………………………………………………….


S.L
Name of
Freight
Forwarder
Name of
Shipper
Name of
Exporter
Name of
Consignee
Port of
Departure
Port of
Destination
MAWB
EXP
number
Freight Collections from Export
Freight Collections from Import
Encashment
ID number
Form FF-Export
Prepaid reference
number
Form FF-Import
Collect
reference number
Remarks
No
Date Prepaid Collect
Freight
Other
Charges
Total Amount
Freight
Other
Charges
Total Amount
USD
BDT
USD
BDT





Date: Date:
Signature and Stamp of the Airline and Agent

Signature and Stamp of the official of AD

--- Page 42 ---
See

Paragraph 2(5)(d) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Paragraph 3(1)(A)(c) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix



DISBURSEMENT STATEMENT FOR AIRLINES FOR THE MONTH OF…………20........

Name and address of the Airline .....................................................................................................................


No.
Items
Amount in Taka

Airport Expenses :
(i) Catering
(ii) Handling
(iii) Landing charges
(iv) Repairs and maintenance
(v) Uplift of fuel/oil
(vi) Sundries

Agency Commission :

(i) Passage
(ii) Cargo

Income Tax

Crew Expenses :
(i) Hotel Bill
(ii) Transport
(iii) Daily Allowances
(iv) Sundries

Office Expenses :

(i) Salaries, overtime
(ii) Provident Fund
(iii) Taxes
(iv) (a) Office rent
(b) House rent of accommodation, if provided to staff

(v) Telephone and telex
(vi) Printing and Stationery
(vii) Postages and Telegrams
(viii) Conveyance and Company Car
(ix) Advertisement and Publicity
(x) Office equipments

(xi) Electric/Gas consumption charges

(xii) Sundries

Refunds :
(i) Passage

(ii) Cargo

Entertainment

Furniture and Fixture

Customs duty etc. on gift articles

10. Local purchases of gift articles

11. Miscellaneous

Total :




Date :
Stamp and Signature of the Airline

--- Page 43 ---
STATEMENT OF CANCELLATION OR REFUNDS OF PASSAGES FOR THE MONTH
OF……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….20
Name and address of the Airline








We hereby certify that the above refunds have been given by us as per foreign exchange regulations in force.



Date:

Sl
No
Name of the
Traveller
Passport or
Pilgrim Pass No
Particulars of monthly return in which
booking was reported to the Bangladesh
Bank
Amount refund
Remarks

















See Paragraph 2(5) (d) of FEPD-1 Circular no. 8/2026
Appendix
Stamp and Signature of the Airline

--- Page 44 ---
See

Paragraph 2(5)(e) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026

Appendix


DETAILS OF CREDIT BOOKINGS OF PASSAGE AND FREIGHT REALISED IN
CASH DURING THE MONTH OF ...............................................................................................
Name and address of the Airline ...........................................................................................................................




Particulars of the Outstanding Credit
Statement in which the bookings made on
credit were reported
Name of the
Freight/Passage
Shipper/Importer/
amount raised
Serial number at which
Passenger
(in Taka)
Items
Month
the credit item appears in
the outstanding credit
Statement


EXPORTS


IMPORTS


PASSAGES


GRAND TOTAL














Date ..................................
Signature and Stamp of the Airline

--- Page 45 ---
See

Paragraph 2(5)(f) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix



DETAILS OF OUTSTANDING BOOKINGS OF PASSAGE AND FREIGHT ON CREDITFOR THE MONTH OF ................................20…
Name and address of the Airlines ...................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................




SI
Name of the
Shipper/Importer/Passenger
Particulars of Passage Statement in which the
credit booking reported

Outstanding Fright
and Passage Amount
(in Taka)
Month
Serial number of the passage/
Freight manifest at which the
credit item appears
A. EXPORTS






B. IMPORTS






C. PASSAGES






GRAND TOTAL









Date .......................................
Signature and Stamp of the Airline

--- Page 46 ---
See

Paragraph 2(5)(g) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Paragraph 2(6)(h) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix














Declaration by airline/shipping company/agent

We do hereby declare that the statement furnished above is complete and factually correct
pertaining to operations for the month/quarter of …………….. We do undertake to be held
responsible for false statement/declaration, if detected.



Signature:
Name of designated official of Airline/Shipping Company/Agent:
Designation:
Date:

--- Page 47 ---
See

Paragraph 2(5)(g) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Paragraph 2(6)(h) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026


CERTIFICATE BY AD BANK

We do hereby certify that we have verified Form FF/Form FF-Export Prepaid/ Form FF Import
Collect from Bangladesh Bank Online Inward Remittance Monitoring System/ Online Export
Monitoring System/Online Import Monitoring System and found all the relevant information in
order. During the reporting month/quarter we have effected outward remittance ……………….
(amount in foreign currency). Necessary taxes of BDT ......................................... as declared by
customers have been deducted/paid.

Signature : ...............................................................................
Name of designated official: ..................................................
Designation: ...........................................................................
Date:........................................................................................
Appendix

10

--- Page 48 ---
See

Paragraph 2(6)(a) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

11



FORM SHIPPING-I
Statement of Freight/Passage Collections by the foreign shipping companies for the quarter
of……………………………………………………………………………………………….
Name of the foreign shipping company……………………………………………………….
Name and Address of the agent………………………………………………………………

S.L Vessel
No
Vessel
Name
Name of
Freight
Forwarder
Name of
Exporter
Name of
Importer
Name
of
Shipper
Name of
Consignee
Port of
Loading
Port of
Destination
MBL
Freight Collections from Export
Freight Collections from
Import
Container.
Detention
/Demurrage/
Handling
Amount
Passage
Others
Encashment
ID number
Form FF-
Export
Prepaid
reference
number
Form FF-
Import
Collect
reference
number
Remarks
No
Date Prep
aid
Collect
Freight
Other
Charges
Total
Amount
Freight
Other
Charges
Total
Amount
no Arrival
date.
Unstaffing
date.
USD
BDT
USD
BDT
USD
BDT



Date: Date:
Signature and Stamp of the Airline and Agent

Signature and Stamp of the official of AD

--- Page 49 ---
See

Paragraph 2(6)(b) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026

Appendix

12

FORM SHIPPING II

DETAILS OF CREDIT BOOKINGS OF PASSAGE AND FREIGHT REALISED IN
CASH DURING THE QUARTER ENDED


Particulars of the Outstanding Credit
Statement in which the bookings
Made on credit were reported
Name of the Vessel
and
Shipowners/Charterer
Freight/Passage
Amount
realized
(in Taka)
Items
Quarter Serial number at which
the credit item appears
in the outstanding
credit Statement
EXPORTS






IMPORTS






PASSAGES






Grand Total






Date :.................................... Stamp and Signature of the

Shipping Company/Agent

--- Page 50 ---
See

Paragraph 2(6)(c) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

13

FORM SHIPPING III



DETAILS OF OUTSTANDING BOOKINGS OF PASSAGE AND FREIGHT ON CREDIT FOR THE QUARTER
ENDED .......................................................................................................................RELATING TO THE CURRENT QUARTER ONLY
Name and Address of the Shipping Company/Agent…………………………………………………………………
Bill of Lading
Number
Port of
discharge/
destination
Date of
sailing
Port of
sailing
Name of
Ship owners/
charterer
Outstanding freight and
passage amount in Taka
Item
Name of the vessel
A. EXPORTS
B. IMPORTS
C. PASSAGES
Grand Total

Date :
Signature and Stamp of
Shipping Company/Agents

--- Page 51 ---
See

Paragraph 2(6)(d) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Paragraph 3(2)(A)(a) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Paragraph 3(2)(A)(b) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

14

FORM SHIPPING-IV
Statement of Expenditure of foreign shipping companies for the quarter of:
Name of the foreign shipping company:
Name and Address of the agent:

S.L
Vessel
No
Vessel
Name
Port
Charges
Customs
Charges
Cargo
Handling
Costs
Victualling
and Store
Supplied
Repairs
Other
Vessel
related
Expenses
Freight and
Passage
Brokerage
Agency fees
and
Commission
Miscellaneous
Expenses
Income
Tax
Provisions
for
disbursement
due but not
yet paid
Refund/Cancellation
Gross Total
Expenses
Add/Subtract:
Adjustments
for provision
made under
14 in
previous
period
Total
Expenditure
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18





Date: Date:
Signature and Stamp of the Airline and Agent

Signature and Stamp of the official of AD

--- Page 52 ---
See

Paragraph 2(6)(d) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

15

FORM SHIPPING-V


STATEMENT OF CANCELLATIONS OR REFUNDS OF FREIGHT/PASSAGES
TO BE SUBMITTED BY THE SHIPPING COMPANY


Name and address of the Shipping Company……………………………………………………………………………………………
for the quarter ended……………………………………………………………………………………


Sl
No.
Name of
Vessel
Name of
Travellers
Passport or Pilgrim
Pass No.
Particulars of the quarterly
return in which booking was reported
to the Bangladesh Bank
Amount refunded
Remarks

We hereby certify that the above refunds have been given by us with the approval of the Bangladesh Bank, where applicable.


Date .............................................
Signature and Stamp of the Shipping Company

--- Page 53 ---
See

Paragraph 2(6)(e) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

16



STATEMENT OF PASSAGES SOLD/TICKETS ISSUED BY THE SHIPPING COMPANY FOR THE QUARTER ENDED


Name and address of the Shipping Company


Sl.
Ticket No.
Name
Nationality
Date of
Name Destination
Route
Particulars of
If sanction of
Amount Remarks
No.
and date
of
& whether Departure
of
to
of
Passport/Pilgrim
the Bangladesh
of issue
Traveller resident of
Ship
which
Journey
Pass
Bank obtained on
Bangladesh
Travelling
Date
No. By whom Form 'P', quote
or
granted
reference of
non-resident
the sanction
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

I/We hereby declare that the passengers whose particulars are given above actually travelled on the dates shown in column No.5 and the above passages
have been properly recorded in our books.



Date ........................................
Signature and Stamp of the Shipping Company

--- Page 54 ---
See

Paragraph 2(6)(f) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

17

FORM SHIPPING-VI

Statement of Commission and Income Tax for the quarter of
Name of the foreign shipping company

Name and Address of the agent






Date: Date:
Signature and Stamp of the Airline and Agent

Signature and Stamp of the official of AD

Freight Collections from
Freight Collections from
Export
(USD)
Import
(USD)
Commission on Export
Revenue
(USD)
Commission on Import
Revenue
(USD)
Total
Agency
Commissio
n (export +
import)
(USD)
Total
Agency
Commissio
n (export +
import)
BDT
Income
Tax
(BDT)
Vessel
No
Prepaid
Collect
Total
Prepaid
Collect
Total
Total
Commission
a ble Freight
Prepaid
Commission
Total
Commissionable
Freight Collect
Commission
Total
Commission
Total
Commissionable
Freight Prepaid
Commission
Total
Commissionable
Freight Collect
Commission
Total
Commission

--- Page 55 ---
See

Paragraph 2(6)(g) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

18

FORM SHIPPING-VII

Statement of Income and Expenditure of foreign shipping companies for the quarter of
Name of the foreign shipping company Name and Address of the agent


SL
No
Particulars
Amount in
Taka
Amount in
Taka
Amount in
USD
1. Balance Brought Forward
Freight and Passage Collections:
(a) Export from Bangladesh
(b) Import into Bangladesh
(c) Detention/Demurrage/Handling/Othe
r Charges
(d) Passage
(e) Other Collections
Total Collections:
3. Inward Remittance Received (if any)
4. Inter agent Transfer (receipts)
5. Outstanding Passage/freight relating to previous
period realized in cash during the quarter
Total Income (2+3+4+5)
6. Total expenditure as per statement of
expenditure (Annexure- FS(II))
7. Outstanding Passage/freight on credit relating to
the collections of current quarter not yet realized.
8. Inter agent Transfer (Payment)
9. Other expenses
Total Expenditure (6+7+8+9)
Remittable Amount (A-B)
Remitted Amount
Balance Carried Forward (C-D)


Date: Date:
Signature and Stamp of the Airline and Agent
Signature and Stamp of the official of AD

--- Page 56 ---
See

Paragraph 3(1)(a) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

19


Serial No ......................................................................................................... Date of Issue .............................................


PROFORMA OF ENCASHMENT CERTIFICATE OF

AUTHORISED DEALERS


We certify having encashed inward remittances/cash foreign exchange/foreign exchange from foreign currency
accounts for total amount of Bangladesh Taka ...............................................................................................
as detailed below fovoring Mr/Ms/M/s………………………………………………………………………..................

Currency
Amount
Account No.
Date of
Name of the statement/schedule
which has been
Encashment
and the period in which the
debited*
relevant transaction has
been/will be reported









Stamp and Signature of Authorized Dealer











*This will apply where foreign exchange is encashed by debit to a Foreign Currency Account.

--- Page 57 ---
See

Paragraph 3(1)(a) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

20



Serial No .........................
Date of Issue .........................





CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORISED DEALERS




We certify that the *cheque/pay order No ...................................................... dated ...................................... for Tk.
............................................... (Taka ........................................................................................... only) has been issued *on/by
debit to Convertible Taka Account No. ..................................................................... maintained by us in the name of
Mr./Ms./M/s.
as
per
Bangladesh
Bank's
Authority
No.
................................................. (State reference No. with date.)




Date .............................
Seal and authorized signature of Authorized Dealer









*Strike out the words not applicable.

--- Page 58 ---
See

Paragraph 3(1)(a) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

21




Serial No .................................................................................................... Date of Issue.........................





CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORIZED DEALERS




We certify that the cheque/pay order No. ............................................................ dated.................................. for
Taka ............................Say............................... Taka....................................................... .has been issued (state
amount in words) by us by debit to Current A/c. No................................................................................ maintained
with us by M/s ...................................................................................................................................................(Name
of the Shipping Agent/Co.)












CERTIFICATE OF SHIPPING AGENT/COMPANY


It is certified that the amount of Bangladesh Taka stated above has been paid by us towards the cost of air
passage of………… ..................................................crews for the sector.....................................................
(number) The amount will be reported by us in our Disbursement statement for the month of ....................








Date ........................................

Seal and Authorized Signature

Date:………………….
Seal and authorized signature of

the Authorized Dealer

--- Page 59 ---
PARTICULARS TO BE FURNISHED FOR DETERMINATION OF TAX LIABILITY UNDER
INCOME TAX ACT, 2023 IN RESPECT OF SHIPPING BUSINESS OF NON-RESIDENTS
Name of the ship
Voyage
Date of arrival
Probable date
Description of
Destination of
Weight/Measurement
with Owner's/
No.
at Bangladesh
of departure with
Cargo loaded
cargo loaded
Charter's name
port with name
name of port
and No. of
and
and address
of port
Passengers
passengers
Rate of freight/
Total freight/
Exchange Rate
Total freight/fare
80% tax liability
Remarks
fare charges
fare received
in terms of Bangladesh
on total freight/
Taka
fare in Taka plus
surcharges, if any
10
11
12
13
We solemnly affirm that the particulars furnished above is
true to the best of our knowledge and belief.
(Agents)


1. Signature of the Deputy Commissioner of Taxes 2. Signature of Customs Authority: 3.Signature of Bangladesh Bank Authority
Date: Date: Date:
(Name and full address) (Name and full address) (Name and full address)
Seal: Seal: Seal:


See

Paragraph 3(2)(c) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Paragraph 3(2)(A)(b) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026

Appendix

22

--- Page 60 ---
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT SHOWING INCOME & EXPENDITURE IN RESPECT OF FOREIGN SHIPPING
CORPORATION FOR THE QUARTER ENDED………………………………………………………………………………

SI
NO
Name &
address of
the foreign
shipping
agent
Credit
balance
from
previous
year
Freight
Collection
during the
quarter
Amount
received
from BSC
or any other
sources
Total
(3+4+5)
Debit balance
b/f from
previous
quarter
Total
Expenditure
Amount
transferred to
BSC’s account
if
Total
(7+8+9)
Balance
Credit
Debit
10.
11.
12.





















Date:
Stamp & Signature of the authorised persons
of the Bangladesh Shipping Corporation

See

Paragraph 6(2)(a) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026



Appendix

23

--- Page 61 ---
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT SHOWING INCOME & EXPENDITURE IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE BY THE FOREIGN AGENTS OF
BANGLADESH SHIPPING CORPORATION FOR THE QUARTER ENDED………………………………………………
SI NO
Foreign Exchange Earnings
Taka Equivalent
Foreign Exchange Expenditure
Taka Equivalent
01
Credit balance from the last quarter

Debit balance from the last quarter

02
Taka collection on account of freights
a) Ship owned by the company
b) Ship chartered by the company
i) Time chartered
ii) Voyage chartered

Amount repatriated to Bangladesh during the quarter
(Necessary repatriation certificate to be attached)

03
Taka collection on account of passage
a) Ship owned by the company
b) Ship chartered by the company

Amount transferred to BCS’ A/C abroad

04
Miscellaneous earning during the quarter
a) Refund on ship stores
b) Refund on final adjustment
c) Charter hire
d) Commission
e) Other receipts

Expenditure incurred abroad during the quarter
(Details as per annexure ‘A’ attached)

05
Total (2+3+4)



06
Funds remitted from Bangladesh (Quote Approval No &
Date)



07
Grand Total (1+5+7)

Grand Total (1+2+3+4)


Note: Balance held abroad with agents Debit/Credit Tk………………………………………………………………………………
(Details of agent-wise position as per Appendix VI/BS)
We hereby declare that to best of our knowledge the above fugure are correct and include all the earnings and expenditures of the Company abroad and that no amount remains unaccounted for.
Place……………………………
Date…………………………… (To be submitted with Annexure A)

See

Paragraph 6(2)(b) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026



Appendix

24

Stamp & Signature of the authorised persons of
the Bangladesh Shipping Corporation

--- Page 62 ---
Annexure-A














Sl. No.
Nature of expenses incurred
Amount in Bangladesh Taka
Bunker:
a) Water
b) Coal
c) Oil

Port Dues

Repairs:
a) Emergency Repairs
b) Dry Docking

Ship Stores:
a) Victualling
b) Bonded
c) Engine
d) Dock

Advance to the Master:
a) Bangladesh Nationals
b) Foreign Nationals

Agency Commission/Fees:
a) Imports
b) Exports

Brokerage

Income Tax

Claims (Cargo)

10.
Medical Expenses

11.
Stevedoring, Tallying etc.
a) Inward Cargo
b) Outward Cargo
c) Dunnage Expenses

12.
Freight Collection/Refund

13.
Charter hire

14.
Travelling, Conveyance etc.

15.
Postage, Cables, Telephone etc.

16.
Air freight



............Contd. .........


CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT SHOWING EXPENDITURE IN
FOREIGN EXCHANGE EQUIVALENT BANGLADESH TAKA
BY THE FOREIGN AGENTS OF BANGLADESH SHIPPING
CORPORATION FOR THE QUARTER ENDED………….20……

--- Page 63 ---
Annexure-A

17.
Boarding/Loading
18.
Transhipment Charges
19.
Printing & Stationery
20.
Advertisement
21.
Laundry Charges
22.
Entertainment Charges
23.
Repatriation Expenses
24.
Legal Expenses
25.
Photo Charges
26.
Miscellaneous Charges
Total:
27. Other Charges incurred by the Offices
approved by the Bangladesh Bank
a) Salaries etc. of Branch Office.
b) Payment made to P & I Club
c) Marconi Charges
d) Conference Expenses
Grand Total :







Date :
Signature & Stamp of the authorized person of
the Bangladesh Shipping Corporation
Page-2

--- Page 64 ---
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT SHOWING BALANCE HELD ABROAD WITH BANKS, MAIN AGENTS AND OTHER CREDIT AGENCIES
FOR THE QUARTER ENDED...........................................

Deposits/Credit
Withdrawals/Debit
Net Balances
Opening
credit
balance
Funds
receivable
from agent
Remittance
from
Bangladesh
Total
Opening
debit
balance
For expenses
abroad
Repatriated to
Bangladesh
Total
Debit
Credit
10


We hereby certify that the information contained in this statement is true and correct in every respect to the best of our knowledge and belief and the statement gives complete
information of all our foreign currency accounts allowed to be maintained.


Place ..................................................

Date ....................................................

Signature & Stamp of the authorized person

of the Bangladesh Shipping Corporation


Note: The statement should be submitted as at 31st March/30th June /30th September /31st December each year within two months from the close of the quarter to which it
relates.
See

Paragraph 6(2)(c) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026



Appendix

25

--- Page 65 ---
See

Paragraph 6(3) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

26



FORM OF STATEMENT OF EARNINGS AND EXPENDITURE
TO BE SUBMITTED BY BANGLADESH BIMAN

NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE AIRLINE

NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE AGENT
NAME OF CURRENCY FOR THE MONTH OF
20


No.
RECEIPTS
Amount
PAYMENTS
Amount


Balance from the last month
(receivable)

Remittances made during the
month (Bangladesh Bank Approval
No., date and amount)
(ii) ........................................... ........
(iii) ......................................... .........
Total :


Balance from the last month
(Remittable)

Amounts received in Bangladesh
during the month
(Bank Certificate to be
attached)
Total collections on account of
passage freight, excess baggage
(Statement showing total passage and
freight earnings separately, to be
attached.)
Expenses incurred abroad during
month (Statement giving breakdown
of expenditure to be attached)
Miscellaneous earnings during
the month (Refunds, other
receipts etc.)
Balance Receivable
Balance Remittable
Total :
Total :


We hereby declare that to the best of our knowledge the above figures are correct and include all earnings of the Company
abroad and no amounts remain unaccounted for.



Place ..........................

Date ...........................


Signature and Stamp of the Airline Company

--- Page 66 ---
See

Paragraph 7(a) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

27


QUARTERLY STATEMENT SHOWING EARNINGS AND EXPENDITURE IN
BANGLADESH IN RESPECT OF VESSELS OWNED BY THE PRIVATE SHIPPING
COMPANIES FOR THE QUARTER ENDED .........................................20…
Name and address of the Company ...............................................................................................................

A. Earnings
Amount
B. Expenditure
Amount
Credit balance from the last
quarter
Debit balance from the last
quarter
1. Name of vessels:
2. Date of Sailing ...................
3. Name of Port ......................
1. Remittance to foreign agent:
(Quote BB's approval No. &
date and also purpose.)
2. Vessel-wise expenditure
(Vessel-wise expenditure
shown in the schedule
attached)
4. Total freight collection
i) Ship owned by the Co.
Export ....................................
Import ....................................
Passage .................................
ii) Ship chartered by the Co.
Import ..................................
Export ....................................
Passage ..................................
(Export/Import
manifest/BL / Export
certificates to be attached)
3. Other payments (state
details)
4. Head office expenses
(state details)
5. Other receipts if any (state
details)
6. Fund received from abroad
(Repatriation Certificate
from the bank to be
attached)
Total :
Total :







............Contd. P/2………………

--- Page 67 ---
Freight payable outside Bangladesh
(state name of port where
the freight will be received)
Net Balance (A-B) Dr/Cr



The figure will not be added to the total figure of earnings.


We certify that the particulars in the above statement are true and correct in every respect to the best of
our knowledge and belief.







Place ................................

Date ................................


Stamp & Signature of the authorized
person of the Company



Note: Supporting Bill/Vouchers in respect of expenditure for Tk.2,500(Two thousand five hundred) and above to
be submitted.





(To be submitted with Annexure)










Page-2

--- Page 68 ---
EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE
Name of Shipping Co ...........................................................
Name of Vessel .....................................................................
Voyage No. .................................................
Name of Port ........................................................................
Date of arrival .............................................
Date of Sailing ......................................................................
SI.No.
Nature of Expenses
Voucher No.
Amount

1, Port Charges :
a) Port dues
b) Pilotage etc.
c) Berth fees
d) Water supply charges
e) Hire of cranes
f) Sundries


2. Custom charges :

a. Light dues

b. Custom penalty
c. Custom overtime
d. Sundries

3. Cargo handling costs:
a) Stevedoring
b) Addl. labour & overtime
c) Lighterage
d) Dunnage supplied
e) Tallying
f) Sundries

4. Victualling & store supplied

5. Repairs

6. Other Vessel expenses:

a) Cable, telex & Postages

b) Stationery
c) Advance to Master
(Quote custom permission No. & date)

d) Wages paid to Bangladesh crews
e) Staff overtime & conveyance
f) Medical fees

g) Fumigation

h) Laundry
i) Cost of passage (Quote approval No. & Date)

j) Bunker supply during....... (month)

(Quote approval No. & date)
k) Sundries

--- Page 69 ---
Freight and passage brokerage: Rebate
paid to exporters/importers Freight
brokerage


Agency fees & commission: a)
Inward cargo
b) Outward cargo c)
Passage
d) Mails



Miscellaneous expenses:
a) Advertisement
b) Hotel bills
(Quote approval No. & date)
c) Sundries



10.

Income Tax


11.
Provisions for other disbursements due but not yet paid

12.
Refund/cancellation of passages/ Freight bookings


Total Tk.










Date ........................... Stamp & Signature of the authorized person
of the Shipping Company








Page-2

--- Page 70 ---
See
Paragraph 7(b) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026

Appendix
28

QUARTERLY STATEMENT SHOWING EARNINGS AND EXPENDITURE OF THE
FOREIGN AGENTS OF BANGLADESH SHIPPING COMPANIES FOR THE
QUARTER ENDED……………………………………20….

Name of the port:
Name and address of Agent:
Name of bank with whom F/C A/C maintained, if any:
Total number of vessels called at port during the quarter:
Name of Vessels called at port:
Date of sailing:
Opening balance:
Due to agent:
Due to Company:

A. Earnings
Amount
B. Expenditure
Amount
Freight
(freight manifest to
be attached)
ii)
Charter hire
iii)
Passage
iv)
Demurrage
v) Other receipts
(state details)
i ) Port dues
ii)
Stevedoring
iii)
Agency fees/commission:
a) Export
b) Import
iv)
Bunker/Water
Victualling & Provision
vi) Repairs/Stores
vii)
Medical
viii) Income Tax
ix) Other disbursements (State details)
B. Transfers
Transfers:
Remittances from Bangladesh
ii)
Remittances from other
agents (indicating name of
port and agent).
iii)
Transfer from Bank A/C in
the same country
Remittance to Bangladesh (Repatriation
certificate to be enclosed.)
ii)
Remittance to other agents (indicating
name of
Port and agent).
iii) Transfer to Bank A/C maintained abroad
(the A/C No. and the name of the bank
should be stated)
Total earnings (A & B):
Total disbursements (A & B):

............Contd. ..........

--- Page 71 ---
Summary

Dr

Cr

1. Opening balance as at 1st January/1st
April/1st July/1st October.



2. Add/subtract excess of earnings/disbursement/
over disbursements/earnings



3. Closing balance as at 31st March/30th June/
30th Sept./31st December



We certify that the above information contained in this statement is true and correct in every respect to the
best of our knowledge and belief and it gives complete information of our earnings and expenditure and
agent's accounts at above port.



Place……………………

Date .................................



Stamp & Signature of the authorized
person of the Shipping Company




Notes:

All earnings and disbursements pertaining to the vessels of the shipping company including those given on
chartered (time voyage) as well as foreign vessels chartered by the Company should be included in this
statement.
A certified copy of the Agent's Statement of A/C. received shall be furnished.

The statement should be submitted together with required documents within 60 (sixty) days from the close of
the quarter to which it relates.
Page-2

--- Page 72 ---
See

Paragraph 7(c) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

29


CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF EARNINGS, DISBURSEMENT AND NET AMOUNT
REPATRIATED TO BANGLADESH FOR THE QUARTER ENDED………………….20….
Name of the shipping company .........................................................................................................

Particulars
Foreign
currency
Bangladesh
currency
Balance from previous quarter
1 . Gross earnings/receipts
a) Freight collection in foreign ports
b) Freight collection in Bangladesh ports
c) Charter hire receipts
d) Passage fare/other receipts
e) Funds repatriated during the quarter
Total earnings/receipts
2. Gross disbursements/Payments
a) In foreign ports
b) In Bangladesh ports
c) Charter hire
d) Funds remitted to Bangladesh during the quarter

Total disbursements
3. Net earnings/receipts (1 -2)

4. i) Loan repayments from funds held abroad
a) Towards principal amount
b) Towards interest/commitment charges
c) Towards Insurance premium
d) Miscellaneous purposes
ii) Loan repayment through remittance
from Bangladesh
a) Towards principal amount
b) Towards interest/commitment charges
c) Towards Insurance premium

d) Miscellaneous purpose
Total repayments

Closing Balance (3-4)

We certify that the particulars in the above statement are true and correct in every respect to the best of our
knowledge and belief.

Place ................................
Date……………………


Stamp & Signature of Chairman / Managing
Director of the Shipping Company



N.B. All items are to be reported in equivalent Bangladesh Taka.

--- Page 73 ---
STATEMENT SHOWING DETAILS OF DEBITS & CREDITS TO FOREIGN CURRENCY A/C NO …………………………MAINTAINED WITH… THE QUARTER ENDED
(TRANSCRIPT RECEIVED FROM FOREIGN BANK TO BE ENCLOSED).
Name of the Shipping Company ................................................................................................................................................. ..........................................


S1
No.

Date

Debit

Credit

Balance

Place where
payment made

Name of the
Vessel

Beneficiary

Purpose

Documentary
evidence

Remarks
10
11












We hereby certifiy that the information contained in this statement is true and correct in every respect to the best of our knowledge and belief and the statement gives complete information of all our
foreign currency accounts allowed to be maintained.

Place ................................

Date……………………



Signature & Stamp of the authorized persons of the Shipping Co.



Note: The statement should be submitted as at 31st March/30th June /30th September/31st December each year within two months from the close of the quarter to which it relates (A photo copy of bank
statement containing the transactions should be enclosed.)
See

Paragraph 7(d) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026



Appendix

30

--- Page 74 ---
See

Paragraph 8(1) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

31

Statement showing passage and freight collections and disbursements made by overseas branch
office/Agent ..................... in .......................during the month of .....................
Instructions:
1.The statement should be completed in duplicate and forwarded to Foreign Exchange Operation
Department at head office of Bangladesh Bank or concerned area office through the designated authorized
dealer bank with whom the local airline maintains account in Bangladesh, before 15th day of the month
succeeding the one to which it relates.
2.The statement should be submitted irrespective of whether remittance of deficit funds, if any, is intended to be
applied for or not.


Passage fares


Total of (1)...
No. of
Tickets/
Amount
Taka
USD






Freight
(a) On Exports
(b) On Imports
(c) Excess/unaccompanied baggage
(d)Others (Please specify)



Total of (2)






Realization against credit booking
during the month
(a) Passage
(b) Freight Exports
(c) Freight Imports
Total of (3)...







Other receipts, if any (Please give details)



Total receipts for the month
(1) + (2) + (3) + (4)



Less: (a) Refund
(i)Passage
(ii) Freight Exports
(iii) Freight Imports
(b)Outstanding
(i) Passage
(ii) Freight Exports
(iii) Freight Imports
(c) Disbursements
(give main particulars in a
supplementary statement)



Total of (6)...


Net
Surplus (+)/Deficit(-) for the month






Less: remittances received
during the month from the branch
/agent abroad
Add: remittances made during the
month vide Bangladesh Bank
approval No...........
Net Surplus/deficit
Add/deduct net surplus/deficit as
at the close of
previous month.............


Net Surplus (+)/Deficit (-)as at the end of


Continued.. P / 2

--- Page 75 ---
We hereby declare that the statements made above are true and correct to the best of our knowledge and belief.

We further declare that -

(i) the freight and passage fare collections have been made by our branch/agent in conformity with the
relevant regulations of the country of operations;

(ii) apart from the collections/receipts mentioned against items 1, 2, 3 and 3 of this statement, no other income
has been derived in.................by our branch/agent (name and address) during the said month;

We also declare and undertake that

(iii) all relevant records in support of the collections/disbursements reported in this statement are held by us
and will be made available for inspection by Bangladesh Bank as and when demanded;

(iv) discrepant amounts noticed during the scrutiny of the statement/documents or short repatriation of
the entitlement will be brought to Bangladesh immediately by inward remittance in convertible foreign
currency in an approved manner.


Place:

(Signature of the Chief Executive Officer
Date :
of the local Airline Company in Bangladesh)

Name:
Designation:

Stamp:
Page-2

--- Page 76 ---
See

Paragraph 8(1) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

32



STATEMENT OF PASSAGES SOLD/TICKETS ISSUED IN BANGLADESH

Name of the Airline

Reporting Month







Serial
N0
Ticket No. and
Date of Isuue
Nationality &whether
resident of Bangladesh
or non-resident
Date of
Departure
Destination to which
travelling

Route of
journey
Particulars of passport/pilgrim
passport
If sanction of the
Bangladesh Bank
obtained Form P,
quote the reference
of the sanction
Amount
Remarks
Date
Passport
No
By whom
granted
10.
11.
12.







































I/We declare that the passengers whose particulars are given above actually travelled on due date shown in column No. 4 and the above passages have been properly recorded in our books.



Date:

Signature and Stamp of the Airline

--- Page 77 ---
See

Paragraph 8(1) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

33

Statement of Freight Collection (Export from Bangladesh)
Name of the Airline

Reporting Month


SI
Master Airway
Bill(MAWB) No
& Date
Port of
Sailing

Port of
Destination

EXP No.
with date
and Bank
Products
Weight
Name &
Address of
Consignee


Name &
Address of
Consignor
Freight
Prepaid/
Freight
Collect

Currency of
Freight
Amount of
Freight in Local
Currency
( Taka)

Amount of
Freight in
Foreign
Currency
10.
11.
12.
13.
































I/We hereby declare that to the best of our knowledge the above figures are correct and have been properly recorded in our books.

Date:
Signature and Stamp of the Airlines

--- Page 78 ---
See

Paragraph 8(1) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

34

Statement of Freight Collection (Import to Bangladesh)

Name of the Airline

Reporting Month


SI
Master Airway
Bill(MAWB) No &
Date
Port of
Sailing

Port of
Destination

IMP No. with
Date & Bank
Product(s)
Weight

Name &
Address of
Consignee

Name &
Address of
Consignor
Freight
Prepaid/
Freight
Collect

Currency of
Freight
Amount of Freight
in Local Currency
( Taka)

Amount of
Freight in
Foreign
Currency
10.
11.
12.
13.






























Total




I/We hereby declare that to the best of our knowledge the above figures are correct and have been properly recorded in our books.


Date:
Signature and Stamp of the Airline/Agent

--- Page 79 ---
See

Paragraph 9(1) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

35

Name of the Shipping Company/Airlines:

Name of the Quarter:



SL
Name of the
Ship/ Aircraft
Nature of the
Ship/Aircraft
(Rented/Importe
d/locally
bought/locally
made)


Name of the
Foreign
company to
whom
ship/aircraft
has been rented
Date of the
rented
agreement
Period of the
agreement
Amount of
rent per
month/quarter
Opening
Balance of
the FC
Account
Amount of
rent earned
during the
period
(Foreign
Currency
Expenses
made in
foreign port.
Amount
Remitted
from
Bangladesh
(Foreign
Currency)
Amount
Enchased
(Foreign
Currency)

Balance of the
FC Account

10.
11.
12.


















Signature and stamp of the Shipping Company/Airlines Signature and stamp of the official of AD


1. Photocopies of bill/voucher should be attached in support of the expenses.
2. Photocopies of Encashment Certificate should be attached in support of encashment of foreign currency.
3. Foreign Currency Account Statement

--- Page 80 ---
See

Paragraph 16(d) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

36

Statement showing the particulars of shipments under outbound air/sea cargo during the period from …………
to……..

1. Particulars of outbound shipments on charges collect basis:
Sl
No

Name of
counterpart
freight
forwarders
Details of MAWB/MBL
Details of
HAWB/HBL
Destination
EXP
No
Date
Charges
paid to
airlines/
Shippin
glines
(Taka)
Charges
receivable
from
overseas
fright
forwarder(FC)
Service
Charges/Profi
t share
payable to
overseas
freight
forwarder
Not amount
receivable(FC)
No
Date
No
Date
10.
11.
12.
13.















Part-A: Statement of earlier months for which receivables remain

Outstanding












Part-B: Statement of Shipments sent during the reporting

Declaration by freight forwarder
We do hereby declare that the statement furnished above is a complete and factually correct statement of HAWBS
/HBLs issued by us during the month of against export made on FOB basis We do undertake to be held
responsible for false statement/declaration, if detected, under FER Act, 1947.

Signature:
Name of designated official of Freight:
Forwarder:
Designation:
Date:

2. Particulars of payment repatriated during the reporting month



Sl
No

Name of
counterpart
freight
forwarders
Details of MAWB/MBL
Details of
HAWB/HBL
Destination
EXP
No
Date
Amount
repatriated (FC)
Encashment
Certificate Ref.
No
Date of Issue
No
Date
No
Date
10.
11.
12.























Certificate by AD bank



We do hereby certify that during the reporting month we have encashed ………..(amount in foreign currency) against
inward remittances and issued certificates as per above statement. Necessary taxes of Tk …………. as declared by
customers have been deducted/paid.


Signature:
Name of designated official:
Designation:
Date:






Instructions:

(a) ADs shall obtain declaration with regards to freight charges and service charges/profit share separately from their freight forwarder-
customers and ensure deduction and payment of applicable taxes, where applicable.
(b) ADs shall advise their freight forwarders to maintain relevant documents which will be made available as and when required by Bangladesh
Bank/other relevant agencies.
(c) ADs shall maintain customer-wise systematic record of inward remittances and copies of relevant encashment certificates with relevant
documents.

Outstanding

--- Page 81 ---
aaa





See

Paragraph 16(d) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

37

Statement showing the particulars of shipments under outbound air/sea cargo during the period from …………
to……..
Name and address of the freight forwarder:
License No.

2. Particulars of outbound shipments on charges collect basis:
Sl
No

Name of
counterpart
freight
forwarders
Details of
MAWB/MBL
Details of HAWB/HBL
Country of
the
Shipment
Ref No
Date
Charges
received/receivabl
e from importer

Charges
payable to
overseas
freight
forwarder(FC
Service
Charges/Profit
share receivable
from overseas
freight
forwarder
Not amount
Payable(FC)
No
Date
No
Date
FC
TK




10.
11.

12.

13.



Part-A: Statement of earlier months for which receivables remain outstanding

Outstanding












Part-B: Statement of Shipments received during the reporting month

Declaration by freight forwarder
We do hereby declare that the statement furnished above is a complete and factually correct statement of HAWBS
/HBLs against inward shipment us during the month of against import made on FOB basis We do undertake
to be held responsible for false statement/declaration, if detected, under FER Act, 1947.

Signature:
Name of designated official of Freight
Forwarder:
Designation:
Date:

3. Particulars of payment repatriated during the reporting month
Sl
No

Name of
counterpart
freight
forwarders
Details of
MAWB/MBL
Details of HAWB/HBL
Country of
the
Shipment
LCAF
No/Ref
No
Date
Charges
received/receivable
from importer

Charges paid
to overseas
freight
forwarder(FC)
Date of
remittance
Not
amount
Payable
(FC)
No
Date
No
Date
FC
TK




10.
11.
12.

13.

14.











Certificate by AD bank



We do hereby certify that during the reporting month we have effected remittance ………….(amount in foreign currency)
against FOB import as per above statement. Necessary taxes of Tk……….as declared by customers have been
deducted/paid.


Signature:
Name of designated official:
Designation:
Date:






Instructions:
(a) ADs shall, before effecting remittances, satisfy themselves with verification of necessary documents such as invoices from counterpart freight
forwarders, import documents, etc. and ensure deduction/payment of applicable taxes, if applicable.
(b) In case of payment received in Taka from importers against import on FOB basis, ADs shall be ensured that the payment is supported
by Form FF- Import Collect as per paragraph 9(c) of this circular.
(c) ADs shall advise their freight forwarders to maintain relevant documents which will be made available as and when required by Bangladesh
Bank/other relevant agencies.
(d) ADs shall maintain customer-wise systematic record of outward remittances with relevant documents.
aaa





Outstanding

--- Page 82 ---
See

Paragraph 16(d) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Appendix

38

Statement showing the particulars of shipments under outbound air/sea cargo during the period from …………
to……..
Name and address of the freight forwarder:
License No.
1. Particulars of outbound shipments on charges collect basis:
Sl
No

Name of
counterp
art fright
forrward
ers
Details of
MAWB/MBL
Details of HAWB/HBL
Country of
the
Destination
Exp
No
Date
Charges to airlines/Shipping lines
(TK)

Charges payable to
overseas freight
forwarder(FC)
No
Date
No
Date


10.

11.












Total

Add Opening Balance

Accounts Payable


2. Particulars of inbound shipments on prepaid basis:
Sl
No

Name of
counterp
art
freight
forward
ers
Details of
MAWB/MBL
Details of HAWB/HBL
Country of
the
Shipment
Ref No
Date
Charges to airlines/Shipping lines
(TK)

Charges receivable from
overseas freight
forwarder(FC)
No
Date
No
Date


10.

11.












Total

Add Opening Balance

Accounts Payable

Adjusted receivable(Payable) [Difference between column 11 of above statements]

Less: Amount repatriated/remitted during the month

Balance receivable (Payable)


Declaration by freight forwarder
We do hereby declare that the statement furnished above is a complete and factually correct statement of HAWBS
/HBLs against outward/ inward shipment during the month of
During the reporting month, we have repatriated/remitted ........... (amount in foreign currency) for which necessary
payment of applicable taxes of Tk........ have been deducted/paid. We do undertake to be held responsible for false
statement/declaration, if detected, under FER Act, 1947.
Signature:
Name of designated official of Freight
Forwarder:
Designation:
Date:










Certificate by AD bank



We do hereby certify that during the reporting month we have enchased inward remittances/effected outward remittance
………………. (amount in foreign currency) on ............... as per above statement. Necessary taxes of Tk ........... as declared by
customers have been deducted/paid.
Signature:
Name of designated official:
Designation:
Date:






Instructions:
(a) Adjustment between receivables and payables may be made subject to deduction/payment of applicable taxes on eligible receivables and
payables and without prejudice to permissions/approvals, if any, required under any other law.
(b) ADs shall, before effecting remittances, satisfy themselves with verification of necessary documents such as invoice from counterpart freight
forwarders, etc.
(c) ADs shall advise their freight forwarders to maintain relevant documents which will be made available as and when required by Bangladesh
Bank/other relevant agencies.
(d) ADs shall maintain customer-wise systematic record of outward remittances with relevant documents

--- Page 83 ---
See

Paragraph 13(1) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Attachment-1

(CS)





Supporting
documents
to be submitted along
with
monthly statement
of courier service
companies (Annexure-A).
Remittance Application.
Invoices issued by head office/principal abroad for the claimed amount.
Approved Form TM mentioning TM ID and remittance information. 
Sales Summary Report of Inbound & Outbound Revenue.(Appendix-1(CS));
Computation of Tax. (Appendix-2(CS)) ;
Tax Challan copy in support of payment of tax.
Auditors' Report certified by a registered chartered accountant. (Appendix-3(CS))
Undertaking. (Appendix-4(CS))
Statement of Commission Earned. (Appendix-5(CS));
Statement of Air Freight Charges (Supported by invoices raised by Freight Forwarder/Airlines).
(Appendix-6(CS)) ;
Statement of Professional/Audit and Tax consultancy Fee. (Appendix-7(CS));
Copy of Encashment Certificate. (if any);
Invoices issued by Audit Firm or Tax consultancy Firm.
Copy of AIT and VAT challan in support of payment of Audit or Tax consultancy fees.
Supporting documents in support of payment of VAT received from clients against Outbound Shipment.

--- Page 84 ---
See

Paragraph 13(3) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026

Attachment-2

(CS)

Supporting documents to be submitted along with Quarterly Statement of courier service companies
operating on Free Delivery basis and does not remit surplus earnings to their Head office/Principal
abroad (Annexure-B).
Application of the Client.
Sales Summary Report of Inbound & Outbound Revenue.(Appendix-1(CS));
Statement of Air Freight Charges (Supported by invoices raised by Freight Forwarder/Airlines).
(Appendix-6 (CS)) ;
Statement of Professional/Audit and Tax consultancy Fee. (Appendix-7 (CS));
Invoices issued by Audit Firm and Tax consultancy Firm.
Copy of AIT and VAT challan in support of payment of Audit and Tax consultancy fees.
Computation of VAT. (Appendix-8 (CS)) ;
Challan copy and "Moshuk-19" in support of payment of VAT.
Undertaking. (Appendix-9 (CS))
Copy of Encashment Certificate in support of inward remittance. (if any);
Income Tax Certificate and Tax return copy of the Agent.
Agent can pay tax on yearly basis. Tax Challan Copy in support of payment of Tax.
Annual Audited Financial Statement of the agent.

--- Page 85 ---
Statement of Income and Expenses For the month of:

Principal:

Agent:



Particulars
Amount(TK)
A. Income
SL.NO
Particulars
Inbound Revenue (Charges Collect)
Outbound Revenue (Prepaid)
Inward Remittance(If Any)
Total Income
B. Expenses
Commission/Service Charge/Delivery Charge
On Inbound and Outbound Shipment
Air Freight (If Any)
Audit/Professional Fees
Legal or Tax Consultancy Fees
Other Expenses(If Any)
Total Expenses
Remitable Amount Before Tax (A-B)
Income Tax
Remitable Amount After Tax
Annexure-A
(CS)

--- Page 86 ---
Statement of Income and Expenses for the Quarter of
Principal:
Agent:

Particulars
Amount(TK)
A. Income
SL.NO
Particulars
Outbound Revenue.
Local Collections.
Inward Remittance(If Any)
Total Income
B. Expenses
Inbound document/Parcel delivery charge
Air Freight(If Any)
Audit/Professional Fees
VAT Paid
Other Expenses
Total Expenses
Profit Before Tax
Tax Payable
Profit After Tax
Annexure-B
(CS)

--- Page 87 ---
Sales Summary Report of Inbound & Outbound Revenue
For the month of

S.L
Product Name
Product
Type
Number of
Shipment
Weight
(Kg)
Rate
Revenue
(Taka)


















Appendix-1
(CS)

--- Page 88 ---
Computation of Tax under Income Tax Act, 2023
For the month of

Total Remittable Amount
Rate of Tax
Amount of Tax





Encl.: Photocopy of Challan No: ---------- aggregating to Taka -------- for payments under Income
Tax Act, 2023.


Appendix-2
(CS)

--- Page 89 ---
Auditors' Report
We have examined the books and records relating to the transactions of
(Principal Company's Name) in Bangladesh carried on by their agent
(Agent's Name) for the month of
We certify that the attached computation of remittable amount is found to be correct
and it truly reflects the revenue of Tk (in word) only as per the books and records and
as confirmed by the invoices raised by (Principal Company's Name).


Auditor's Signature with Date
Appendix-3
(CS)

--- Page 90 ---
UNDERTAKING

We do hereby undertake in connection with our advice for remitting the surplus earnings of BDT (in
words) equivalent to USD/any other Foreign Currency only for the month of that if excess remittance is made
or due taxes are unpaid anyhow or any kind of irregularities/ discrepancies are found by Bangladesh Bank/ Authorized
dealers/ Auditors or any other competent authority during the subsequent scrutiny, the excess remittance shall be
repatriated/ adjusted by us forthwith as may be required. We shall also be accountable for the irregularities/ discrepancies
found.


Signature by Authorized person of the Agent With date




Appendix-4
(CS)

--- Page 91 ---
Statement of Commission Earned
For the month of

Particulars
Commission Percentage (%)/ Rate
Amount of Commission (BDT)
Total Outbound
Total Inbound
Total












Appendix-5
(CS)

--- Page 92 ---
Statement of Air Freight Charges
For the month of


Name of
Airlines
Destination
Weight/Volume
Rate
Freight Charges















Appendix-6
(CS)

--- Page 93 ---
Statement of Professional/Audit and Tax consultancy Fee
For the month of




Appendix-7
(CS)
Particulars
Amount (BDT)
Professional/Audit
Fee

Add: VAT
Tax consultancy Fee (If any)
Add: VAT


Total

--- Page 94 ---
Computation of VAT

For the month of

Appendix-8

(CS)

Particulars

Amount

Rate of VAT

Amount of VAT

Total Outbound Revenue

Total Local Sales

Encl.: Photocopy of Challan No:
Value Added Tax and Supplementary Duty Act, 2012.

aggregating to Taka

for payments under

(ভ্যাট পরিশোধের স্বপক্ষে মৃসক-১৯ দলিলপত্রের কপি ও চালানের কপি অত্র বিভাগে দাখিল করতে হবে)

--- Page 95 ---
UNDERTAKING
We do hereby undertake that if any kind of irregularities/discrepancies are found in the submitted documents by
Bangladesh Bank/Authorized dealers/Auditors or any other competent authority during the subsequent scrutiny or due
taxes/VAT are unpaid, we shall accountable for the irregularities/discrepancies found or be liable to pay due taxes/VAT.


















Appendix-9
(CS)

--- Page 96 ---
User Manual
for
Inward Remittance Monitoring System
Disbursement Acknowledgement






Prepared by
IT Operation and Communication Department
Bangladesh Bank
See

Paragraph 2(1)(c) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Paragraph 3(1)(a) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Paragraph 16(a)(i) of FEPD-1 Circular No. 8/2026
Enclosure

--- Page 97 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 1


Introduction
This manual contains instructions about how to give input to Encashment and Disbursement Detail Form using Inward Remittance
Monitoring System.
Prerequisite
You will need to follow the below mentioned things to use Online Inward Remittance Monitoring System:
1. Must be expert in fundamental usage of computer (Typing, OS, MS Word, Email, Browsing Internet etc.)
2. A laptop or desktop computer. Laptop will be better for places where power failure occurs frequently.
3. A good Internet connection. Multiple internet modems must be purchased from different mobile operators.
4. Operating System (OS): Windows 7 or more/ Linux/Mac OS. Desktop or Laptop OS can only be used. Mobile OS like Android,
iphone/ipad OS etc cannot be used.
5. An internet browsing software e.g. Mozilla Firefox, Internet Explorer, Google Chrome etc. Two years older version of said
browser software may cause unexpected result.
6. Login ID or User ID provided from Bangladesh Bank for Inward Remittance Monitoring System.

--- Page 98 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 2


At First Login to “Inward Remittance Monitoring System”
Now Click on “Non Wage Entry” Tab

--- Page 99 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 3




Now click on “Encashment” Menu

--- Page 100 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 4



Now click on link “Create Encashment”

--- Page 101 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 5




After clicking on the link “Create Encashment”, the Encashment Form will be shown:

--- Page 102 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 6


Now fill up with the desired CformId in the “Encashment” Form. After typing CformId,
corresponding Received Date, Payment Date, Currency, FC Amount, Country, Remitter Name
will be shown automatically like below:

--- Page 103 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 7




After typing all the field values, click “Create” button.

--- Page 104 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 8


After clicking “Create” button, value will be inserted.

--- Page 105 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 9


Now, to give input in “Disbursement Detail” Form, click “Create” button

--- Page 106 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 10


Now, Fill up the field in the “Disbursement Detail” Form, then click “Create” button

--- Page 107 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 11


After Clicking “Create” button, Data will be saved and shown like below:

--- Page 108 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 12


To insert more data, again Click “Create” button, then fill up all the fields in “Disbursement
Detail” Form and finally Click “Create” button as previous one to save that data.

--- Page 109 ---
User Manual for Inward Remittance Monitoring
Page 13


To print data, Click “Print PDF” button: