--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department-1
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd
FEPD-1 Circular No. 09






Date: May 11, 2026

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Release of foreign currency for visa bond/
refundable security deposit for visa purposes
Dear Sirs,

Please refer to paragraph 32 of FE Circular No. 37 dated September 30, 2025 regarding
remittances on account of visa fees.

02. To facilitate visa applicants, it has been decided that Authorized Dealers (ADs) may, on
behalf of individual applicants, remit for visa bonds or refundable security deposits to embassies,
high commissions, or other competent authorities where such remittance is required as a
precondition. Alternatively, ADs may issue international or virtual cards in the name of applicants,
preloaded with the required amount of bond or security deposit amount. For existing cardholders
under travel entitlement, ADs may reload the cards with the required amount, provided that such
amount is used solely for the stated visa purpose. The visa bond or security deposit shall be
repatriated to Bangladesh immediately upon release by the concerned authorities.

03. Prior to effecting such remittance or issuing/reloading international cards, ADs shall
observe the following instructions:
(a) ADs shall verify the applicant’s valid passport and an official demand letter, invoice, or
other relevant document issued by the concerned embassies, high commissions, or competent
authorities, clearly specifying the requirement of the visa bond or refundable security deposit,
including the amount, currency, and refund terms.
(b) ADs shall obtain the visa application reference or acknowledgment, along with any
other relevant supporting documents.

04. The above facilities are also applicable against balance held in ERQ accounts, RFCD
accounts, or through transactions by international cards issued against such accounts, subject to
observance of the respective instructions in this regard.

05. ADs shall maintain a separate register for such transactions and actively monitor the
status of bond release/refund. Necessary follow-up shall be ensured to facilitate timely repatriation.

06. All transactions are subject to routine reports to Bangladesh Bank, compliance with
regulations on applicable taxes, AML/CFT norms, and other applicable rules.

Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of all concerned constituents.


Yours faithfully,


(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD-1)
Phone: 9530123