--- Page 1 ---
www.bb.org.bd
Payment Systems Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka-1000


PSD Circular No-07 Date:


Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,


Bangladesh Automated Cheque Processing System (BACPS) Operating Rules and Procedures.

Please refer to PSD Circular No. 01, dated January 17, 2010 on the captioned subject.

Bangladesh Automated Cheque Processing System (BACPS) Operating Rules and Procedures
issued vide PSD Circular No. 01/2010 has been reviewed further with a view to facilitating the banks in
clearing and settlement operations under the upgraded BACPS system.

All scheduled banks that participate in the Bangladesh Automated Clearing House (BACH) are
hereby advised to follow the attached BACPS Operating Rules and Procedures V 2.0 for their clearing
and settlement operation with immediate effect.

Please acknowledge receipt.



Enclosure:
Bangladesh Automated Cheque
Processing System (BACPS)
Operating Rules & Procedures V2.0

Yours sincerely,

Md. Mezbaul Haque
General Manager
Phone: 9530174





20 Agrahayan 1426
05 December 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Bangladesh Automated Cheque Processing System (BACPS) V 2.0

Operating Rules & Procedures

--- Page 3 ---
2 | P a g e






PART I: OPERATING RULES

--- Page 4 ---
3 | P a g e

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PAGE NO
Table of contents
3-6
List of acronyms

PART I: OPERATING RULES


CHAPTER 1: BACPS Overview
8-9
1.1
INTRODUCTION
1.2
SCOPE
1.3
OBJECTIVES
1.4
MEMBERSHIP

A. ACCESS CRITERIA
B. PROCEDURES FOR MEMBERSHIP
C. SUSPENSION
D. TERMINATION
Figure
Clearing Process of Paper Based Instruments through BACPS
10
1.5
DEFINITIONS
11-14

CHAPTER 2
GENERAL RULES
15-21
2.1
GENERAL PRINCIPLE
15
2.2
APPROVED PAYMENT ITEMS
15
2.3
PRESENTING BANK
15

2.3.1 SENDING APPROVED PAYMENT ITEMS
15

2.3.2 SECURITY PROCEDURES
15-16

2.3.3 PRESENTING BANK'S RESPONSIBILITY
16-17
2.4
PROCESSING OF ITEMS
17
2.5
DELIVERY & RECEIPT OF ITEMS UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
17
2.6
SECURITY OF ELECTRONIC DATA FILE
17
2.7
CORRESPONDENT BANK
17
2.8
TIME SCHEDULE, SETTLEMENT DATES AND EXTENSION OF TIME
LIMITS
17-18
2.9
DESIGNATION OF SETTLEMENT ACCOUNT
18
2.10
SETTLEMENT
18
2.11
POSTING OF TRANSACTION/CREDITING CUSTOMERS' ACCOUNT
18
2.12
PAYING BANK
18-19

2.12.1 PAYING BANK'S RESPONSIBILITY
19

2.12.2 RETURN OF ITEMS AND FUNDS
19
2.13
RECORDS
19
2.14
FEES
20
2.15
PENALTY
20
2.16
BANGLADESH BANK LIABILITY
20
2.17
MEASURE OF DAMAGES
21
2.18
RIGHT TO AMEND
21

CHAPTER-3
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
22
3.1
GENERAL RULES
22
3.2
CURRENCIES TO BE CLEARED
22
3.3
ELIGIBLE ITEMS AND INSTRUMENTS
22


CHAPTER-4
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMAGE CAPTURE
23-24
4.1
GENERAL STANDARD
23

--- Page 5 ---
4 | P a g e

4.2
IMAGE CAPTURE
23
4.3
IMAGE USABILITY STANDARD
23
4.4
RETURN PROCESS
23
4.5
POOR SOURCE DOCUMENTS
23
4.6
PIGGY BACK ITEMS
23-24
4.7
LIABILITY OF PRESENTING BANK
24

4.7.1 USABILITY
24

4.7.2 PIGGY-BACK
24

CHAPTER-5
CREATION AND EXCHANGE OF BACPS CHEQUE ENVELOPE
25
5.1
BACPS CHEQUE ENVELOPE CREATION
25
5.2
BACPS CHEQUE ENVELOPE TRANSMISSION
25
5.3
CLASSIFICATION OF BACPS CHEQUE ENVELOPE
25
5.4
ACCEPTING AS BACPS-ELIGIBLE ITEM
25
5.5
RESPONSIBILITIES OF RECEIVING POINT
25

CHAPTER-6
PRESENTMENT, RETURN AND EXCEPTION PROCESSING
26-28
6.1
INTRODUCTION
26
6.2
SCOPE
26
6.3
PRESENTMENT
26
6.4
RETURN BY PAYING BANK
26
6.5
TIME LIMITATION
26
6.6
ITEMS WITH FORGED OR UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE AND FORGED
ENDORSEMENT
26
6.7
REPRESENTED ITEMS AND RIGHTS OF PAYING BANK
26
6.8
METHOD AND ROUTING OF RETURN
26
6.9
IMAGES IN A BACPS RETURN CHEQUE ENVELOPE
26
6.10
BACPS ELIGIBLE ITEMS WITH INCOMPLETE/MISSING
ENDORSEMENTS
27
6.11
FORGED ENDORSEMENTS OR MATERIAL ALTERATIONS
27
6.12
MISDIRECTED RETURNED BACPS ITEMS
27
6.13
PIGGY BACK ITEMS
27
6.14
WORDS AND FIGURES DIFFER
27
6.15
STALE DATED ITEMS
27
6.16
RE PRESENTMENT
27
6.17
GENUINENESS OF CHEQUE
27
6.18
BUSINESS CONTINUITY PLAN
28

CHAPTER-7
DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISM
29-32
7.1
Dispute Resolution
29
7.2
COMPOSITION OF PANEL
29
7.3
LODGEMENT OF ARBITRATION
30
7.4
PRESENTMENT OF ARBITRATION
30
7.5
CONVENING THE PANEL AND INVITING THE PARTIES
30
7.6
ADDITIONAL MEETING OF THE PANEL
30
7.7
THE DISPUTE FILE
30
7.8
RECORD KEEPING
30-31
7.9
DECISION/AWARD
31
7.10
ACCEPTANCE OF THE PANEL'S DECISION
31
7.11
ADDITIONAL CLARIFICATION BY A SPECIAL PANEL
31
7.12
THE PROCEDURES FOR DISCUSSION IN THE PANEL AND FOR
INITIATING CLARIFICATION
31
7.13
COSTS
31
7.14
PROPOSALS FOR CHANGES IN RULES
31
7.15
PUBLICATION OF THE HIGHLIGHTS OF THE CLARIFICATION
31

--- Page 6 ---
5 | P a g e

7.16
INDEMNIFICATION OF ARBITRATION PANEL
31
Figure
Dispute Resolution Cycle
32





PART II: OPERATING PROCEDURES

PAGE NO.
BACPS Operating Procedure
33
CHAPTER 1:
OPERATIONAL OVERVIEW
34
1.1
INTRODUCTION
34
1.2
JURISDICTION
34
1.3
CLEARING SESSIONS
34

CHAPTER 2
OVERVIEW OF CLEARING PROCEDURE UNDER IMAGING AND
TRUNCATION ENVIRONMENT
35-36
2.1
TRUNCATION POINT
35
2.2
SETTLEMENT
35
2.3
DIGITAL SIGNATURES
35
2.4
USE OF SECURE NETWORK
35
2.5
STORAGE AND ARCHIVING SYSTEM
35
2.6
SCANNING STANDARD
36

CHAPTER 3
PRESENTMENT FOR CLEARING PROCEDURE AT THE PRESENTING
BANK
37-40
3.1
PRESENTING BANKS DUE DILIGENCE REQUIREMENTS
37
3.2
SORTING OF INSTRUMENT
37
3.3
STAMPING
37
3.4
CAPTURE OF IMAGES AND DATA
37
3.5
REJECT REPAIR AND BALANCING
38
3.6
DIN (DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION NUMBER) ENDORSEMENT
38
3.7
RE PRESENTED CHEQUES
38
3.8
VALIDATION
38
3.9
CLEARING INFORMATION SYNCHRONIZATION
38
3.10
IMAGE QUALITY CHECKING
39
3.11
HANDLING IQA FAILURE
39
3.12
PRESENTING BANKS SUBMITTING ELECTRONIC DATA AND
IMAGES
39
3.13
FREQUENCY OF SUBMISSION
39
3.14
ALTERNATIVE DELIVERY MEDIA
40
3.15
ELECTRONIC FILES ACCEPTED BY THE BACPS
40
3.16
ELECTRONIC FILES NOT ACCEPTED BY THE BACPS
40
3.17
INTERNAL CONTROL
40

CHAPTER 4
PROCESSING AT PARTICIPATING BANK MODULE: OUTWARD
CLEARING
41-42
4.1
PARTICIPATING BANK MODULE (PBM)
41
4.2
DUPLICATION CHECKING
41
4.3
RECEIVING OUTWARD PRESENTMENT
41
4.4
IMAGE QUALITY ANALYSIS AND FAILURE HANDLING
41
4.5
ITEM PROCESSING
41
4.6
SESSION ATTACHMENT
41
4.7
USE OF PKI
42
4.8
REGIONAL HOLIDAY & BLOCKAGE
42
4.9
RECONCILIATION OF OUTWARD PRESENTATION
42

--- Page 7 ---
6 | P a g e


CHAPTER 5
PROCESSING AT PARTICIPATING BANK MODULE: INWARD
CLEARING
43
5.1
RECEIPT OF INWARD DATA/IMAGES
43
5.2
VALIDATION
43
5.3
CONTROL MECHANISM
43

CHAPTER 6
PROCESSING AT BRANCHES/BANK’S IN CLEARING SYSTEM
44-45
6.1
DUPLICATION CHECKING
44
6.2
DIGITAL CERTIFICATE VALIDATION
44
6.3
PAYMENT PROCESSING
44
6.4
RETURNED CHEQUES
44
6.5
EXTENSION REQUEST FOR RETURNS
45
6.6
REQUESTS FOR PAPER
45
6.7
INTERNAL CONTROL
45
6.8
RECONCILIATION OF CLEARING DIFFERENCES
45

CHAPTER 7
TYPE OF FILES
46
7.1
SPECIFICATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC EXCHANGE OF CHEQUES
46
7.2
ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE
46
7.3
OUTWARD ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE
46
7.4
OUTWARD RETURN ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE
46
7.5
INWARD ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE
46
7.6
INWARD RETURN ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE
46
7.7
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE
46
7.8
ONLINE INQUIRY
46

ANNEXURE 1
BACPS PARTICIPANT AGREEMENT AND INDEMNITY (On Tk. 150
Judicial Stamp)
47
ANNEXURE 2
Return Reason Codes
48

--- Page 8 ---
7 | P a g e

: List of Acronyms:




ACE
Archive Electronic Cheque Envelope
AICS
Active Image Clearing and Settlement System
BACH
Bangladesh Automated Clearing House
BACPS :
Bangladesh Automated Cheque Processing System
BCV
Batch Control Voucher
CD
Compact Disc
CE
Cheque Envelope
CH
Clearing House
CHM
Clearing House Module
DIN
Document Identification Number
DVD
Digital Versatile/Video Disc
ECE
Electronic Cheque Envelope
ECP
Electronic Cheque Presentment
FC
Foreign Currency
ICE
Inward Electronic Cheque Envelope
IQA
Image Quality Analysis
IRE
Inward Return Electronic Cheque Envelope
KYC
Know Your Customer
MICR
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition
OACK
Outward Acknowledgement
OCE
Outward Cheque Envelope
ORE
Outward Return Electronic Cheque Envelope
PBM
Participating Bank Module
PKI
Public Key Infrastructure
PSD
Payment Systems Department

--- Page 9 ---
8 | P a g e


CHAPTER I: BACPS OVERVIEW


1.1 INTRODUCTION

Bangladesh Automated Clearing House (BACH) is the first automated national payment infrastructure
established in 2010. BACH has proved its significance in country's payment and settlement system
over last ten years by reducing time and risks of payment and settlement in the country.

Improvisation of such national infrastructure with the advent of new technology and business
requirement is an ongoing process. Hence, Bangladesh Automated Cheque Processing System has
undergone significant improvements including the introduction of FC clearing in recent days. The new
system aims to replace the existing Automated Cheque Clearing Systems.

This foreign currency clearing and settlement will only cover the domestic foreign currency
transactions within the jurisdiction of Bangladesh and will not cover overseas or cross-border cheque
clearing and settlement service.

These operating rules highlights the system architecture for a general user and the roles and
responsibilities of the various stakeholders within the legal and regulatory framework to achieve a safe,
secure and efficient inter-bank image exchange cheque clearing and settlement system.

1.2 SCOPE

This rule will apply to all paper-based payment instruments, both in local and foreign currency
denomination within the territory of Bangladesh and those are eligible for BACPS as set out in
section 3.3 of Chapter 3.

1.3 OBJECTIVES

1. To facilitate the clearing and settlement of paper-based payment instruments among Scheduled
Banks operating in Bangladesh;
2. To reduce time and cost of domestic clearing and settlement cycle and to protect the customer
interest;
3. Minimize paper handling and manual intervention at the cheque clearing process;
4. Ensure timely, accurate and efficient transfer of funds among participants (i.e. Bank customers)
using paper-based instruments and
5. Maintain proper risk mitigation measures and dictate storage and retrieval of image and
information of all transactions for future reference.

1.4 MEMBERSHIP

A. Access Criteria:

Upon application, BACPS membership will be open for the scheduled banks licensed by the
Bangladesh Bank which meets the following criteria:
Must conform the technical requirement to connect with the Bangladesh Automated Clearing
House;
ii.
Must maintain current account with the Government that is maintained in the Bangladesh
Bank.

B. Procedures for Membership:

Agreement for membership shall be signed between concern bank and Bangladesh Bank as per
Annex 1 of these rules.

--- Page 10 ---
9 | P a g e

C. Suspension:

A member shall be suspended from BACPS in case of any of the following events:

a) In breach of a prudential requirement;
b) If the member proved to be not acted in the highest principles and interest of the clearing and
settlement procedures;
c) An event occurs which affects, or may affect, the ability of the participant to participate in sending
and receiving the payment instructions and
d) The participant breaches its obligations under these Rules or the applicable procedures and fails
to rectify the breach or to provide an acceptable justification;
e) Any other reason for which the BB authority may deemed appropriate to suspend the bank from
automated cheque clearing facility.

The suspended participant may be reinstated after the reasons for suspension have been rectified.
Bangladesh Bank as the Clearing House authority will, as soon as reasonably possible, notify all
participants of re-commencement date of operation for the suspended participant.

D. Termination:

A participant‟s membership shall be terminated from BACPS upon:

a) Withdrawal of membership;
b) Becoming insolvent in terms of the provisions of the Bank Company Act, 1991 (amended in
2013); and
c) Termination by the Clearing House in accordance with these Rules.

--- Page 11 ---
10 | P a g e



































Fig: Clearing process of paper based payment instruments through BACPS











Drawer Pays by
Cheque of 'X'
Bank
Receiver accepts
payment by
cheque
Receiver deposited the
cheque to their bank `Y'
[Presenting Bank]
Bank `Y' Scan the
Cheque and Create
'OCE'
'OCE' received
by BACPS
Clearing house send the
file as ICE to bank `X'
Paying Bank
Bank `X' scrutinize
the cheque
Bank 'X' honored
the cheque
Create ORE with
proper return
reason code
`ORE' file sent to
BACPS
BACPS sent
the file to bank
`Y' as 'IRE'
Accept
Reject
Bank 'X' debit
drawer account

--- Page 12 ---
11 | P a g e


1.5 Definitions

In these Rules,

1. “Account” means an account with reserve and/or clearing balances on the books of the
Bangladesh Bank.

2. “Approved Payment Item” means a payment item that meets the requirements of BACPS- Eligible
Item.

3. “Archive” means a repository used to store and index Images and associated information for
necessary retention and accessibility.

4. “BACH” means the central system and facility that supports the Exchange and settlement of
payment instruments and instructions between Participating Banks.

5. “BACPS” means the facility that clears and settles cheques and other approved paper-based
payment instruments for participating Banks.

6. “BACPS-Eligible Item” means an electronic copy of a paper-based Payment instrument that the
Presenting Bank certifies is a copy of the original instrument acceptable for clearing under Image-
Exchange System and is listed as one of the instruments in Chapter 3, section 8 of these Rules.

8. “Participating Bank Module” means the software and associated hardware that manages the
transmission and receipt of BACPS Cheque Envelopes, acknowledges receipt of BACPS Cheque
Envelopes, and interfaces with particpating Banks‟ host systems.

9. “BACPS Cheque Envelope” means an electronic file contains electronic information representing
BACPS-Eligible Items that is exchanged between a Sending and a Receiving Point.

10. `Bangladesh Bank' means central bank of Bangladesh established under the Bangladesh Bank
order, 1972.

11. “Bank”: means a Bank company established under The Bank Company Act, 1991.

12. "Batch" means the transmission or processing of payment items/instruments collectively in a
group.

13. "Batch Control Voucher (BCV)" is a document that precedes a batch of physical instrument. BCV
contains information such as number of instruments and total amount of that batch.

14. “Business Day” means a Banking Day including all days except weekly holidays and all approved
Bank Holidays.

15. “Cheque” is a bill of exchange drawn on a specified banker and not expressed to be payable
otherwise than on demand, as defined in Negotiable instrument Act 1881.
16. “Cheque Image” means a digital representation of the front and back of a cheque.
17. "Cheque in the electronic form" means a cheque which contains digital representation of the front
and back of a paper cheque (cheque image), and is generated, written and signed in a secure

--- Page 13 ---
12 | P a g e

system ensuring the minimum safety standards prescribed by Bangladesh Computer Council for
the use of digital signature.
18. “Cheque Truncation” means the process by which the physical movement of a cheque, for clearing
and settlement purpose, among participating bank of BACPS is stopped and is replaced by the
exchange of images and corresponding electronic information.

19. “Clearing” means the exchange of payment instructions between payment system participants or
between payment systems, and includes without limitation, the processes associated with
clearing, sorting, editing, netting and prioritizing such instructions or orders in whatever form these
take.

20. "Clearing Cycle" is a pre-determined activity schedule, consisting of presentment cut off, return
cut-off and the settlement timing.

21. "Clearing House Module" is a suite of components installed at the Clearing House that validates
the data while receipt of inward cheque envelope and delivery of outward cheque envelope.
22. “Clearing System” means a set of procedures whereby participants present and exchange
information relating to the transfer of funds or securities to other participants through a centralized
system or at a single location and includes mechanisms for the calculation of participants‟
positions on a bilateral or multilateral basis with a view to facilitating the settlement of their
obligations.

23. “Convenience Amount” means the amount that appears on a paper instrument that is normally
written in numeric values.

24. “Correspondent Bank” means a participating bank acting on behalf of another Participating Bank to
send and received approved payment items to and from Bangladesh Bank.

25. “Counterfeit Item” means an Item that appears to be original or genuine, but has fraudulently being
built by tampering or forging any part or the item as a whole in order to misappropriate fund.

26. "Cut-off" means a designated time beyond which certain BACPS functions cannot be performed.

27. "Digital Signature" is a computer algorithm, generated and authenticated generally by a Public Key
Infrastructure, used to validate the contents and the sender's identity of electronically transmitted
documents that are exchanged among participating banks.

28. "Electronic Cheque": is an electronic version of a paper cheque, generally cheque image, that
resembles the physical cheque and are used for the purpose of clearing and settlement.

29. “Electronic Cheque Presentment (ECP)” means the electronic transmission, by an institution
authorized to draw a cheque, of an image and payment information of the cheque, to the payee
institution on which it is drawn.
30. "Endorsement" is a system and/or method to ensure that a payment instrument is came from a
particular presenting bank.
31. "Endorsement line" is a printed line on the back of a instrument which shall be the unique identifier
for the instrument.

32. “Exchange” means the delivery and receipt of Payment Items.

--- Page 14 ---
13 | P a g e


33. “Forged or Unauthorized Signature” means (i) a signature on the face of an Item that is not the
signature of the person (the drawer) that it purports to be, or (ii) a signature that is written on or
applied to an Item without the drawer‟s authority.

34. “Force Majeure” means any event beyond the control of a Participating Bank that could not be
avoided by the exercise of standard care as is reasonable in the circumstances, including natural
calamities (earthquakes, natural floods, storms), fire, explosion, war, insurrection, riot and civil
disorder.

35. “High Value Items” means payment items amounting taka 5.00 (Five) lacks and above or
otherwise declared by BB under this clause for the purpose of presentment in high value session
of BACPS.

36. “Instrument” means either a negotiable instrument (i.e. Cheque, Payment Order, Demand Draft
etc.) or other instrument (such as government cheque) that are eligible under BACPS
environment for processing for payment.

37. “Item” means an instruction for payment via an approved payment instrument that is processed by
BACPS under these rules.

38. “Legal Amount” means the amount of an instrument that is normally written in words.

39. “Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR) means the machine readability of numeric data
printed with magnetically charged ink in the instrument.

40. “Material Alteration” means an unauthorized change to one or more of the completed details of an
instrument including those mentioned in the Negotiable Instruments Act,1881 which are
alterations: (i) to the date, (ii) to the sum payable, (iii) of the time of payment, (iv) of the place of
payment, or (v) of the addition of a place of payment without the acceptor‟s assent where an
instrument has been accepted generally, as well as any alteration of the Paying Bank or of the
payee name.
41. "Misdirected Return" means the outward return file send to wrong destination by the Paying Bank
due to diverse error.
42. “Netting” means the determination of the net payment obligations or the determination of the net
termination value of settlement obligations between two or more system participants within a
system.
43. “Net Settlement” means a settlement procedure in which final settlement of transfer instructions
occurs on a net basis at one or more discrete, pre-specified time during the processing day.

44. “Participating Bank” means a Bank who is a participant in the BACPS.

45. “Paying Bank” means the Bank upon which an instrument is drawn on.

46. "Payment Instructions" mean an electronic message including image of an instrument requesting
the transfer of funds on a payer to the order of payee.

47. "Person” means a legal person is any human or non-human entity (i.e. any human being, firm, or
government agency) that is recognized as having privileges and obligations, such as having the
ability to enter into contracts, to sue, and to be sued.
48. “Positive Pay” means banks compare a personal or company's record of cheque issued with
cheque presented for payment;

--- Page 15 ---
14 | P a g e

49. “Presenting Bank” means the Bank that presents a Cheque or other instruments in BACPS for
collection.

50. "Proprietary CA (certification authority) is an entity that issues digital certificates, however without
keeping connected with a root CA. A digital certificate certifies the ownership of a public key by
the named subject of the certificate. This allows other participants in a system to rely upon
signatures or on assertions made about the private key that corresponds to the certified public
key.

51. “Public Key Infrastructure” is the framework of encryption and cyber security that protects
communications among the parties of a system. PKI ensures data authenticity, integrity and non-
repudiation. It works by using two different cryptographic keys, a public key and a private key and
are based on digital certificates.
52. BACPS Return Item” means the corresponding payment information of a BACPS-Eligible Item that
is returned to the Presenting Bank in accordance with and for any reason permitted by these
Rules.
53. "Return Reason Code" is a code to indicate the reason for returning a payment as Unpaid or
Unapplied.

54. “Sending Point/Receiving Point” means a bank will have one single point of connectivity with
BACPS which will be termed as sending/receiving point. The PBM will be located at this point.
55. "Settlement" is a central bank function through which participating banks are discharged from their
obligation in respect to payments for items that are cleared through BACPS. This function is
completed when concerned central bank department/section posts the net settlement amounts to
participating banks' account maintained at the central bank after each clearing cycle.

56. “Settlement Account” means participating bank‟s account at the Bangladesh Bank (generally
current account) that are being used for the purpose of BACPS settlement.

57. “Settlement Date” means the date for settlement of an item as provided in these Rules.

58. “Settlement System” means a System established and operated by Bangladesh Bank or any other
System for the discharge of payment obligations as well as of settlement of obligations in relation
to securities

59. “Service Branch” is a branch which will act as a sending and receiving point, for each individual
bank there will be only one service branch for each bank (generally Local Office).

60. “Truncation Point” is a point from which physical movement of an instrument is stopped, here the
image and data will be captured and transmitted to the service branch/BACPS. A bank may have
multiple truncation points.

61. “Unqualified Item” refers to an item which does not meet the criteria of a BACPS-eligible Item.

62. “Unusable Image” means an Image that does not meet the requirements of the BACPS Image
Usability Standard.

--- Page 16 ---
15 | P a g e


CHAPTER II: General Rules


2.1 GENERAL PRINCIPLE
The BACPS Rules govern the clearing and settlement procedures of approved paper based payment
instruments to be processed through the Bangladesh Automated Cheque Processing System (BACPS).

a. The BACPS Rules are issued pursuant to Regulations 9 of the Bangladesh
Payments and Settlement Systems Regulation, 2014. These rules are obligatory on
a Presenting Bank that sends items to the BACPS, a Paying Bank that receives
items from the BACPS and on account holders who have agreed to settle for items
under these rules.

b. Any BACPS approved payment item that is sent to the Bangladesh Bank for clearing
and settlement is subject to the provisions of these Rules. The Bangladesh Bank
processes such items as a BACPS operator and does not collect, present, or return
such items as a “collecting” or “returning” Bank, except in its performance of its
responsibilities as banker to the Government and as banker to the banks and for its
own payments.

2.2 Approved Payment Items

Paper-based payment items that are specified in the BACPS rules and that conform to the
following requirements may be exchanged for the purpose of clearing and settlement service:

a. they are drawn on a participating Bank;

b. they are payable on demand;

c. they are identified in accordance with BACPS formats and the rules;

d. they conform to the requirements set out in these rules, including those relating to
the value and value date; and,
e. Paper-based payment items drawn on Government of the Peoples Republic of
Bangladesh and payable at Bangladesh Bank or any pre-specified Scheduled Bank.

2.3 Presenting Bank

2.3.1
Sending Approved Payment Items

A Participating Bank that maintains a Current Account (may be termed as a Settlement Account
as well) at the Bangladesh Bank, may send an approved payment item to the Bangladesh Bank
for clearing and settlement. The item must be in the format and media that the Bangladesh Bank
prescribes and are in conformity with the applicable BACPS rules.

2.3.2
Security Procedures

The security procedures that Bangladesh Bank follows to verify the authenticity of the source of an
item are as follows:

a. All Outward Cheque Envelopes will be digitally signed and encrypted by the Presenting Bank
before transmission to BACPS and all inward Cheque Envelopes for the Paying Banks will be
digitally signed and encrypted by BACPS before being transmitted to the Paying Bank.
Participating bank must ensure that the instruments processed and transmitted from

--- Page 17 ---
16 | P a g e

CBS/CPS to PBM are secured and the information of these instruments has not been
tampered or altered in the way of transmission.
b. Each Participating Bank shall prevent any disclosure of any aspects of the security
procedures offered by Bangladesh Bank. The Participating Bank shall notify Bangladesh Bank
immediately if the confidentiality of these security procedures is compromised, and shall act to
prevent the security procedure from being further compromised.

2.3.3
Presenting Bank's Responsibility

By presenting an approved BACPS-Eligible Item for payment to Bangladesh Bank, the Presenting
Bank:

a) agrees to comply with the applicable BACPS rules and agrees that those rules will govern
the relationships among all of the participants.
b) certifies that the front and back images of the BACPS-Eligible Item is a copy of the
original instrument;
c) verifies the prima facie genuineness of the instrument with due diligence and with
ordinary care. The due diligence and ordinary care includes verification of the presence of
all important fields such as date, amount in word & figure, signature and the valid tenor of
the instrument; the physical feel of the instrument and thereby try to detect evidence of
material alteration (if any) that is visible to the naked eye. In addition presenting banks
have to ensure the use of magnifying glass and a UV detector for detecting any distortion
of the important fields that may be detectable via the absence of erasable UV ink.
Besides all these compulsory due diligences, banks may decide to employ additional risk
management techniques for high value instruments, alerts for new account etc.
d) agrees to bear the responsibility for any types of loss that is occurred through lack of
practicing due diligence as mentioned in para 2.3.3(c) on the part of the presenting bank ;
e) upon realization of the proceeds of an instrument, the bank shall pass the same to their
customer account on the date of settlement ;
agrees to make the original BACPS eligible item available within seven (07) calendar
days for inspection during normal business hours, if requested by the Paying Bank.
g) agrees that, failure to meet the request of the Paying Bank to present the original
negotiable instrument will result in non-payment of that instrument. And in case of
properly producing, the original instrument will remain with the Paying Bank and the
liability for preservation of that instrument will be shifted to the Paying Bank;
h) authorizes the Bangladesh Bank to use the current account (settlement account) to settle
the amount for items presented and received under each clearing cycle ;
bears the responsibility to reconcile their entire presentation and receipts by collating the
information from files received through BACPS within the clearing cycle ;
should have the capacity of completing/rectifying any mis-read MICR line data (if any)
on items that experienced it. However, the bank may only rectify/amend a maximum of
three (3) digits of the total MICR line data of an instrument;
k) agrees to pay charges for clearing instruments as per the policy of Bangladesh Bank and
also ensure all parties concern that they are not overcharging their customer ;
agrees to mark stop payment instantly on items for which a stop payment request
(through letter or email as well as over phone from designated person/BACPS Manager)
has been received from a paying bank within the return cut-off. Upon receipt of such
request later than the stipulated time the presenting bank shall stop the payment
immediately subject to non-payment of the customer's account;
m) agrees to inform BACPS within 30 minutes of settlement if any mismatch found; and

--- Page 18 ---
17 | P a g e

n) agrees to indemnify the participating banks including Bangladesh Bank for any loss or
expense (including attorneys fees and expenses of litigation) incurred as a result of the
Presenting Bank‟s negligence or non compliance with any of the clauses of the BACPS
Operating Rules and Procedures. This however, does not limit any other agreement,
authorization or indemnity, not inconsistent with these Rules, made by a Bank, its
Correspondent Bank, or the Bangladesh Bank.

2.4 Processing of Items
As an operator of BACPS, Bangladesh Bank clears and settles items in accordance with the applicable
BACPS rules. Bangladesh Bank may reject, or may impose conditions to its clearing and settlement of
any approved payment item for any reason. Bangladesh Bank will not act on instructions other than
information required by specific format applicable to BACPS rules. Except as expressly provided in
these rules, Bangladesh Bank does not have or assume any responsibility for a Participating Bank's
non-compliance with applicable BACPS rules.

All items, except local demand drafts and Foreign Taka/FC Demand Draft sent to be processed through
the BACPS must contain the Paying Bank‟s MICR encoded routing number as well as other information
as required in the BACPS operating rules. It is the presenting Bank‟s responsibility to enter the correct
routing number in the item‟s data field for local/foreign taka demand drafts. Bangladesh Bank may
process an item on the basis of a routing number of a Participating Bank appearing in prescribed form
on the approved payment item when received.


2.5 Delivery and receipt of Items under special circumstances

Generally, Bangladesh Bank will receive as well as deliver approved payment items through authorized
communication channel. In case of emergency situation, a presenting Bank or Paying Bank may use
corrupt-free removable storage media, as prescribed and acceptable by Bangladesh Bank, to deliver
and/or receive items to and from BACPS.

2.6 Security of electronic data file

The electronic file of payment items shall be encrypted using the PKI infrastructure specified by the
BACPS and be transmitted electronically or exceptionally delivered on a corrupt-free acceptable
removable storage media. If delivered on removable storage media, a letter signed by an authorized
bank signatory shall accompany this. The removable storage media and the letter shall be placed to
Bangladesh Bank in a sealed envelope well before the concern cut-off time.

2.7 Correspondent Bank

A Participating Bank with prior approval from Bangladesh Bank may designate another Participating
Bank (Correspondent Bank) for sending and/or receiving payment items from BACPS on its behalf. It is
the Participating Bank‟s responsibility to ensure that the Correspondent Bank complies with the
obligations under these Rules.

2.8 Time Schedules, Settlement Dates And Extension of Time Limits

BACPs will operate on normal banking days. At the beginning of the year, the holiday calendar will be
duly broadcasted to the participant bank by the BACPS system. Any changes in working days/ holidays
or in the time schedules will be broadcasted electronically by the BACPS system as and when required.

The BACPS will have two separate clearing windows for presentment and return having separate time
schedules for High Value Items, Regular Value Items and Foreign Currency items. If because of
circumstances beyond the Bangladesh Bank‟s control, the time schedule is delayed, the time for acting
may be extended. The time for acting is extended upto the time necessary to complete the action,
provided the Bangladesh Bank exercises such diligence as the circumstances required.

--- Page 19 ---
18 | P a g e


Extension of existing cut-offs is also allowed as per request of a participating bank, however only as a
diligent exercise and under unavoidable and emergency circumstances stipulated in the BACPS rules.

2.9 Designation of Settlement Account

As part of membership requirement before the commencement of operation and as participant under
BACPS arrangement, a Participating Bank must open/designate a Current Account at Bangladesh
Bank for BACPS transactions. Participating Bank uses the local currency current account to settle the
local currency instruments while for the Foreign Currency (FC) instruments they will use FC accounts
(for that designated currency) maintained with the Bangladesh Bank for settlement.

As per the provision of these rules, participating bank authorizes the Bangladesh Bank to post to their
accounts at Bangladesh Bank any Consolidated Net Settlement Positions of amounts (both in local and
foreign currency) that shall occur directly or indirectly as a result of the clearing of Eligible Items and the
actions of the BACPS, and will at all times maintain funds in these accounts adequate to cover such
settlement of payments in eligible currencies.

By designating a Settlement Account, a Bank authorizes the Bangladesh Bank to debit or credit the
designated Account on the Settlement Date with the value of the items sent by the Bank to the
Bangladesh Bank and to debit and credit to the designated Settlement Account the amount of other
transactions (including fees, unless otherwise agreed) with respect to BACPS Items. The Bangladesh
Bank may in its discretion, recover the unpaid balance of the Participating Bank‟s obligation with
respect to an item from the Participating Bank respectively without prior notice.

2.10 Settlement

The Bangladesh Bank will post the settlement amount to Participating Banks‟ designated Settlement
Account at a pre-fixed time (generally at the end of each clearing cycle). Settlement among
participating banks will occur on a net basis and will be final and irrevocable when posted.

2.11 Posting of Transaction/Crediting Customers' Account

On receipt of the Net Settlement Positions of the member banks from the BACPS, the concerned
department of Bangladesh Bank shall arrange settlement for the participants. Participating Banks must
post the transaction (debit or credit) to their customers‟ account on the Settlement Date.

2.12 Paying Bank

2.12.1 Paying Bank's Responsibility

The Paying Bank should examine the cheque's image and other electronic information from the inward
cheque envelope sent by the Presenting Bank and shall verify the following information:
The drawer bank, branch
Name of drawer
Payee's name must be present
Valid date (must not be stale or post-dated)
Amounts in words and figures match
MICR Code line must be present
Alterations are counter-signed
Crossings are present

--- Page 20 ---
19 | P a g e

The drawer's signature in the electronic scanned copy should be identical to the authorized
signature at the bank

A Paying Bank, by maintaining or using an Account with the Bangladesh Bank for settlement of
items or by accepting an item from the Bangladesh Bank agrees to:
comply with the applicable BACPS rules and agrees that those rules govern the relationships
among the parties relevant to the transaction;
process the item in accordance with these Rules ; i.e .will check the fund availability of the
account and will verify the customer's signature mentioned on the presented item;
verify via positive pay instructions before payment of items carrying the value of the required
limit as set by the Bangladesh Bank from time to time and bear the responsibilities of losses
incurred by other BACPS participants due to non-compliance of performing Paying Bank‟s
responsibility (i.e. positive pay instruction) ;
authorize the Bangladesh Bank to post the amount of a payment item to the Paying Bank‟s
Settlement Account on the Settlement Date; also ensure sufficient balance in the settlement
account for meeting the payment obligations arise out of cheque clearing activities;
use appropriate return reason code for non- payment of any clearing instrument.
provide notice of stop payment [via e-mail, phone or any other media] to the Presenting Bank
in the case of failure to return an item within the return cut- off [due to unavoidable
circumstances or technical issues and on the same business day]. If the Paying Bank identify
the issue on a later stage , the bank shall immediately request the Presenting Bank to stop the
payment;
verify that all the inward items have been received, therefore ensure that there has been no
data loss in the transmission process from BACPS. If any files are corrupted/lost in the time of
transmission the bank may request the Bangladesh Bank for retransmission of images and
data;
ensure that their host application can prevent the payment of a duplicate instrument;
agrees to inform BACPS within 30 minutes of settlement if any mismatch found;
indemnify the participants (including Bangladesh Bank) for any loss or expense (including
attorneys‟ fees and expenses of litigation) incurred as a result of non-performing the
responsibility on the part of the Paying Bank.
the proposition that the agreements, authorization and indemnity do not limit any other
agreement, authorization or indemnity not inconsistent with these Rules, made by a Paying
Bank to a Presenting Bank, the Bangladesh Bank or other person(s).

2.12.2 Return of Items and Funds

A Paying Bank may return an approved payment item to the Bangladesh Bank in accordance with
the applicable BACPS rules adhering to the deadline set forth in the rules. The Paying Bank is
accountable for the amount of the payment item if the returned item is not received by that deadline.

The Bangladesh Bank processes a returned payment item it receives from a Paying Bank and
sends it or makes it available to the Presenting Bank in accordance with the provisions of these
Rules.

2.13 Records

1. Presenting banks are responsible for preserving original paper instruments (physical
instruments) for six years from the settlement date to permit resolving issues that may arise
concerning the handling of instruments. If the instrument is sent to Paying bank [as per the
request of the Paying bank], the Paying bank will also preserve the item for 6 years from the
settlement date.

--- Page 21 ---
20 | P a g e


2. Bangladesh Bank will preserve the electronic information (image and data) of all clearing
instruments in its central Archive for 12 years. Bangladesh Bank may decide to preserve the
information both online and offline mode and can split the timeline of 12 years accordingly.

2.14 Fees

The Bangladesh Bank shall charge fees for processing payment instruments (i.e. cheque, pay
orders, demand drafts and other eligible items) and will provide notification to participating banks of
such fees from time to time. In addition, Bangladesh Bank may impose a penalty to a Participating
Bank for violating Rules and other instructions in this connection. These fees may be charged
directly from concerned banks current account.

2.15 Penalty

The Bangladesh Bank may impose penalties under section 109 of the Bank Company Act, 1991
(amended on 2013) for misuse and non-compliance of the operating rules or/and on:
Customer complaints, such as delayed sending payment instrument and delayed credit to
the customer's account;
Participant Complaints-such as Incorrect Return Reason;
Any other situation Bangladesh Bank authority deems fit for applying penalties.

Other than these, the Bangladesh Bank may charge fines on participating banks on different
grounds like, non-standard cheques, cheque alteration, unpaid transaction, delayed data
transmission, wrong stamping, late availability, late settlement, insufficient fund etc.

The extent of penalties may be imposed on the member banks considering the degree of non-
compliance. Moral suasion and fine may be the initial form of penalty. For breach of prudential
requirements, the BB can suspend the participation of member bank in BACPS for a while which
may be reinstated after the reason for suspension have been rectified. And if the member bank
repeatedly and/or reluctantly creates such offence, termination of the membership from BACPS
would be the final step.

2.16 Bangladesh Bank Liability


The liability of Bangladesh Bank is limited by the following:

a. Bangladesh Bank is responsible or liable to a Participating Bank, only for its own failure to
exercise ordinary care, or for its own or its employees‟ willful gross misconduct ;
b. Other than Government payment items, Bangladesh Bank does not act as the agent or
subagent of another Bank or person and is not liable for the insolvency, neglect, misconduct,
mistake or default of another Bank or person ;
c. Bangladesh Bank does not make any warranty with respect to an item it processes or settles
for under these Rules, and
d. No person may make a claim for an item against Bangladesh Bank for loss resulting from
Bangladesh Bank‟s clearing of or settling after one year from the Settlement Date of the
item. If a Bank does not send written objection to an advice of debit to Bangladesh Bank
resulting from clearing activity within thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of the advice, it is
deemed to approve the debit.

--- Page 22 ---
21 | P a g e


2.17 Measure of Damages

The measure of damages for Bangladesh Bank‟s failure to exercise ordinary care, or for its
own or its employees‟ willful misconduct, for a payment item (including a returned item), is
limited to the amount of the item reduced by an amount that could not have been realized by
the use of ordinary care. Where there is willful misconduct with respect to an instrument, the
measure of damages must not include other damages that are attributable directly and
immediately to the willful misconduct, even if such consequences were foreseeable at the time
of such misconduct.

2.18 Right to Amend

The Bangladesh Bank reserves the right to amend these rules from time to time.

--- Page 23 ---
22 | P a g e

CHAPTER III: General Requirements

3.1 GENERAL RULES

1. Each BACPS-eligible Item shall be Exchanged, Cleared and Settled in accordance with these Rules.

2. All instruments except for BDT Demand Drafts, foreign taka Demand Drafts and FC Demand Drafts
must contain MICR encoded routing number along with other essential MICR information in order to be
eligible for BACPS.

3. An Image of each BACPS-eligible Item shall be captured prior to truncation in accordance with these
Rules.

4. Each Presenting Bank shall retain original paper Items (source documents) for a period of six years
from the settlement date.

5. Each Presenting Bank may destroy source documents following the expiration date of the source
document (i.e. six years from the settlement date).

6. Where a Bank uses a Correspondent Bank to perform a particular function, the Bank shall ensure
that the Correspondent Bank will comply with the requirements applicable to that Bank as set out in
these Rules. Each Bank shall remain responsible and liable for the functions performed by its
Correspondent Bank.

3.2 CURRENCIES TO BE CLEARED

The currencies to be cleared are Bangladeshi Taka (BDT), United States Dollar (USD), United
Kingdom Pound (GBP), European Union and its territories currency - Euro (EUR), Japanese Yen
(JPY), Canadian Dollar (CAD) and any other currency that may be added by Bangladesh Bank from
time to time.

3.3 Eligible items and instruments

The following MICR encoded payment items are eligible for clearing in accordance with these rules:

1. Savings Bank Account
Pay Order
2. Current Account Cheque
Government Cheque
3. Cash Credit Account Cheque
Credit Card Cheque
4. Dividend Warrant
10.
Foreign Taka Demand Draft
5. Demand Draft
11.
Foreign Currency Cheque
6. Refund warrant
12.
Foreign Currency Demand Draft

--- Page 24 ---
23 | P a g e




CHAPTER IV : Requirements for Image Capture

4.1 General Standard


Each Presenting Bank shall capture Images in accordance with the BACPS Image Usability
Standard and BACPS Active Image Clearing Specifications (AICS).

4.2 Image Capture


Two (2) Image segments shall be captured for all BACPS-eligible items:

a. Black and White Image of the front

b. Black and White Image of the back

4.3 Image Usability Standard


An Image is considered usable if it meets the following standards:-

Legible: The Image is legible if it can be read or deciphered by a human viewer.
Viewable: The Image is viewable if there is perceived content in the field and the content can
be viewed without obstruction.
Usable Image: Image usability is of key importance for allowing a Paying Bank to process an
item on the basis of an Image. A usable Image is a clearly represented digital picture of an
instrument. An Image is usable when all of the following criteria are met:
the date field must be legible on the image of the instrument ;
ii.
the MICR line must be legible on the Image of the item ;
iii.
the account number in the MICR line is Legible on the Image of the instrument ;
iv.
the payer information must be Legible on the Image of the instrument ;
the Convenience Amount must be Legible on the Image of the instrument ;
vi.
the Legal Amount must be Legible on the Image of the instrument ;
vii.
the payer‟s signature must be Legible on the Image of the instrument ;
viii.
the payee name, if present on the instrument, and required for stop payment
processing, is Viewable on the Image , and
ix.
the payee endorsement(s), if present on the instrument, is Viewable on the Image
of the item.

4.4 Return Process:

If an Image of an item is not usable according to the above definition of a usable Image, the
item may be returned within the time frames citing appropriate return reason.

ii.
The Presenting Bank has the option to re-scan the source instrument and transmit the Image
as a new item to the Paying Bank.


4.5 Poor Source Documents:

If the Image of an instrument is not usable due to the quality of the source document, the
Presenting Bank may:
i. Return the physical instrument to its customer.

--- Page 25 ---
24 | P a g e

ii. Forward the source document itself to the Paying Bank for payment (i.e., put it on for
collection outside the clearing house).

4.6 Piggy Back Items

A piggy-back situation occurs when an instrument is Image-captured with another instrument or
instrument(s) with the appearance of forming one Item. Where a piggy-back situation occurs, the
Presenting Bank shall correct the situation by re-capturing multiple instruments separately, as the
case may be.

4.7 Liability of Presenting Bank

4.7.1
Usability

Each Presenting Bank shall be responsible to the Paying Bank for the usability of each Image that
it captures and presents up to the end of one consecutive Exchange Cycle commencing on the
Date of Presentment at which point the Paying Bank assumes responsibility and liability for the
usability of the Image.

4.7.2
Piggy Back

Where a Presenting Bank receives a Returned BACPS Item as a result of a piggy-back situation
(Section 4.6) and is unable to locate the original Instrument for re-capture, the presenting Bank
shall be responsible and liable for any loss.

--- Page 26 ---
25 | P a g e

CHAPTER V: Creation and Exchange of BACPS Cheque Envelope


5.1 BACPS Cheque Envelope Creation

Each BACPS Cheque Envelope shall be created in accordance with the BACPS Active Image
Clearing Specifications (AICS).

5.2
BACPS CHEQUE ENVELOPE TRANSMISSION

Each BACPS Cheque Envelope shall be transmitted and received in accordance with the times set out
in Part II (Operating Procedure).

5.3
CLASSIFICATION OF BACPS ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE CREATION

The following collection types shall be used for the classification of presented items during the BACPS
Cheque Envelope creation process:

'01' : Outward Cheque Envelope (for regular value)

'21' : Outward Return Cheque Envelope (for regular value)

'09' : Outward Cheque Envelope (for high value)

'29' : Outward Return Cheque Envelope (for high value)


For Foreign currency transaction the applicable codes will be as follows:

Type of
Instrument
(Cheque)
Transaction
Code

Type of Instrument
(Demand Draft)
Transaction
Code
USD Cheque
61
USD Demand Draft
71
GBP Cheque
62
GBP Demand Draft
72
EUR Cheque
63
EUR Demand Draft
73
JPY Cheque
64
JPY Demand Draft
74
CAD Cheque
65
CAD Demand Draft
75


5.4 ACCEPTING AS BACPS ELIGIBLE ITEM

Each Participating Bank shall identify each BACPS-eligible Item by populating the appropriate
identification fields in the BACPS Cheque Envelope as set out in the AICS. The High Value
collection type can only be indicated when the item meets the value.

a. for any item, a Presenting Bank will capture the information of the MICR line and will add
the amount field thereto. In case of MICR misread, the Presenting Bank will not repair
more than three (3) digits of MICR information.
b. where more than three (3) digits of unread MICR information would be found on an
instrument, the Presenting Bank shall classify the item as „Unqualified‟ for processing and
shall return the same to the customer.
a Presenting Bank may enter account number which doesn‟t exist in pre-printed MICR line
for Government cheques only.

5.5 RESPONSIBILITIES OF RECEIVING POINT

Each Receiving Point:

a. shall receive BACPS Cheque Envelopes delivered to it via BACPS.
b. for BACPS-eligible Items Exchanged and Cleared in collection type "High-Value/Regular
Value/ FC", shall verify the contents of the BACPS Cheque Envelope and if necessary
return the item in accordance with the return cut-off established in the BACPS rules.

--- Page 27 ---
26 | P a g e


CHAPTER VI: Presentment, Return and Exception Processing


6.1 Introduction
This Part contains the rules applicable to presentment, return and exception processing for BACPS
eligible items. Nothing in this Part precludes a Paying Bank or a Presenting Bank from exercising its
rights and seeking recourse outside of the Rules. Before taking such actions, however, it is
recommended that the parties concern first lodge complaint with Payment Systems Department of
Bangladesh Bank and seek mediation thereto.

6.2 SCOPE

The return procedures, timeframes and responsibilities set out in this Part shall apply to all
Participating Banks and shall limit the degree to which they can seek recourse from other Bank.

6.3 PRESENTMENT

A BACPS-eligible Item is presented to the Paying Bank when a Cheque Envelope containing the
BACPS-eligible Item is accessible by the Paying Bank on the Participating Bank Module (PBM).

6.4 RETURN BY PAYING BANK

Where payment of a BACPS-eligible Item is refused, the Paying Bank may initiate a return file with the
appropriate return reason code contained in Annexure-2 and submit the same within the deadline and
adhering to BACPS Operating Procedures.

6.5 TIME LIMITATION

I. Each Returned BACPS Item shall be send back to the Presenting Bank as soon as possible but no
later than the return cut-offs contained in the BACPS Operating Procedures. Returns that are
presented beyond the return cut-off will be automatically rejected by BACPS.

II. The Presenting Bank shall ensure that the system is accessible as soon as the Returned BACPS
Item is available.
III. The Correspondent Bank shall ensure that an Image of each BACPS-eligible Item and all relevant
Returned BACPS Item information is accessible by the Presenting Bank as soon as possible.

6.6 ITEMS WITH FORGED OR UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE AND FORGED ENDORSEMENT

For greater certainty, where an item contains a „Forged or Unauthorized Signature‟ and either a
„Forged Endorsement‟ or the intended Payee(s) was not paid, the Item shall be returned in accordance
with section 6.5 (I) of these rules. And in addition the paying bank should inform the issue to
Presenting Bank and Bangladesh Bank separately via mail.

6.7 REPRESENTED ITEMS AND RIGHTS OF PAYING BANK

A Returned BACPS Item that has been send back for any reason by the Paying Bank shall not be
presented by the Presenting Bank a fourth time, i.e. third representment,

6.8 METHOD AND ROUTING OF RETURN

Where a BACPS-eligible Item is presented using BACPS Cheque Envelope, the corresponding
Returned BACPS Item shall send back using the same information such as cheque details, routing
number etc. and shall be returned using the applicable return reason code(s) in accordance with the
BACPS Operating Procedure and AICS specification.

--- Page 28 ---
27 | P a g e

6.9 IMAGES IN A BACPS RETURN CHEQUE ENVELOPE

Where a Returned BACPS Item is send back within the time set out in the BACPS Operating
Procedures, no image segment shall be included in the BACPS Cheque Envelope.

6.10 BACPS ELIGIBLE ITEMS WITH INCOMPLETE/MISSING ENDORSEMENTS

Where the Endorsement on a BACPS-eligible Item is missing or incomplete the item can be returned
for the reason “Incomplete or Missing Endorsement” using the return reason code in Annexure 2.

6.11 MISDIRECTED RETURNED BACPS ITEMS

Each Misdirected Returned BACPS Item shall be forwarded by the recipient to the Presenting Bank
using the return reason code specified in Annexure 2.

6.12 PIGGY BACK ITEMS

If any item is received by a paying bank as piggyback item, the paying bank must return the item to the
presenting bank.


6.13 WORDS AND FIGURES DIFFER

Where the amount expressed in words on the face of an Item differs from the amount written in
figures, the Item shall be returned for the reason “Amount in figure and word differs” within the
timeframe stipulated in section 6.5 I.

6.14 STALE DATED ITEMS

Each BACPS-eligible Item dated (presentment date is) more than six months from the issuing date
may be returned unpaid for the reason “Cheque out of date”.

6.15 RE PRESENTMENT

1. Where a Presenting Bank receives a return for the reason “Insufficient fund”, the Presenting
Bank, or its Correspondent Bank, may represent the Returned BACPS Item within the validity
period of the check following the first presentment time;

2. If representing a Returned BACPS Item, the Presenting Bank shall create a BACPS Cheque
Envelope in accordance with AICS Functional Specifications;

3. A Returned BACPS Item that is eligible for re-presentment may only be represented twice; and

4. A Returned BACPS Item that is represented may not be subsequently returned for the reason
“Unusable Image”.

6.16
GENUINENESS OF CHEQUE

1. The Presenting Bank shall verify the prima facie genuineness of the instrument to be truncated
and attempt to detect any fraud, forgery or tampering apparent on the face of the instrument
that can be verified with due diligence and with ordinary care (using UV detector) and other
device if required.


2. The Presenting bank shall be responsible for detecting the genuineness of the cheque leaf,
material alteration of payee name, amount or date. In such cases where genuineness cannot
be verified or material alteration is detected; the presenting bank should not submit such
cheque(s) to the BACPS and take proper measures in consultation of bank authorities as well
as with the Paying bank and Bangladesh Bank to bring the fraudsters under justice.

--- Page 29 ---
28 | P a g e


3. Payment Instrument issuing banks must follow set physical security standards properly as
prescribed by the Bangladesh Bank. If any security features of the instruments are missing or
the design is not as per the approved specification, the issuing bank will be solely responsible
for any fraudulent activities resulting from the violation of the approval.


6.18 BUSINESS CONTINUITY PLAN:

1. Participants shall be required to have Business Continuity Plan to ensure uninterrupted clearing
of payment instructions which shall include:
(i.) Timely replication of primary site operations to a secondary site, and
(ii.) Ability to timely operate from the Secondary site in case the primary site is not available.
2. Participants shall periodically test their Business Continuity Process and maintain testing
reports.
3. The BACPS shall provide contingency facility (alternative delivery media) for BACPS
participants to send and receive BACPS files in the event participants are facing connectivity
problems on their site.

For example, the business continuity plan would be as follows:
Scenario-1: The member shall immediately inform their concerned officials to investigate and
provide an immediate resolution. At the same time, the bank must inform the BACPS of that
failure and the progress for resolution in written form.

Scenario-2: In case of operating the clearing function from primary BACPS the manager of
BACPS shall immediately inform all the participants of the failure via telephone, fax or e-mail.
The Bangladesh Bank will activate the business continuity site and restart the BACPS from the
business continuity site. BB shall inform all participants when the services are restarted. The
member bank must reconnect their CPS workstations to the business continuity site and
resume processing.


In switching the service to the business continuity site, the participants must reconcile their
pending cheques and presented/returned cheques at the business continuity system, and if
necessary, to perform re-capture of any paper cheques which are not identified in the business
continuity system.

Scenario-3: The BACPS is a fully web based system. In case of any BACPS workstation failure,
participants shall reconnect to BACPS from any working workstation with the necessary
configuration and web browser.

Banks shall also have at least one backup CPS scanner for their respective branch. Banks
shall use the backup scanner in case of a prolonged failure occurs to the primary scanner.

--- Page 30 ---
29 | P a g e

CHAPTER VII: DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISM


7.1 Dispute Resolution:

This rule outlines the procedures for settlement of disputes among participating banks that arises out of the
clearing of BACPS payment items.

All disputes in respect of the Rules are to be dealt at a managerial level preferably through BACH managers
by the participating banks. The participating bank that disputes a returned item/settled item shall inform the
other clearing bank within five (05) working days following the returned item/settlement. The report shall
inform in writing, clearly explaining the nature of the dispute. Queries raised by a member bank on another
bank should be timely responded to at least within a maximum of five (05) working days. Matters which
cannot be settled amicably shall be referred promptly to the higher managerial level of the respective
Bank‟s Head Offices.

Arbitration:

Where the dispute cannot be resolved between the participating banks, the parties may proceed to
Arbitration. Arbitration rule applies equally to paper as well as electronic payments.
The guiding principle in case of a paper-based instrument is that a Presenting Bank and its
customer is not relieved from their normal liabilities in respect of any Eligible Item merely because
the Paying Bank has failed to carry out any of the Rules relating to the handling of the Items. A
Presenting Bank may refuse to accept Eligible Items in respect of such cases where the provisions
of the rules have not been followed;
Upon receipt of a valid request from the payer about a possible fraud, a Paying Bank will request the
presenting bank to withdraw the funds from the payee's account of a settled instrument. The
Presenting Bank shall reverse the transaction and send the proceeds back to the Paying Bank. The
amount would be blocked by the Paying Bank on its customers account until the decision is awarded
by the Arbitration Panel;
Any Bank involved in a dispute with another Bank, which cannot prima facie be settled by mutual
agreement at the Head Office level, may submit the relevant facts to the Payment Systems
Department (PSD) of the Bangladesh Bank for the Arbitration alongwith complete details of the
dispute within fifteen (15) working days from the date of receipt of the complaint from the customer.
In this regard, the following steps shall be followed:
i. An interim reply shall be given to customer within fifteen (05) working days from the date of receipt
of complaint.
ii. The PSD shall convene a meeting with the Banks under dispute and resolve the disputes by
mutual agreement within ten (10) working days after receiving the notice of Arbitration. Additional
meeting may be arranged if necessary.
iii. All such disputes shall not take more than sixty (60) working days from the date of receipt of
complaint for their resolution. However, in case of lack of direct or circumstantial evidence or if
further investigation is needed, additional time may be taken to make the decision which must be
rational.
7.2. Composition of Panel:
An Arbitration Panel may be constituted to rule on and settle disputes arising under these rules between
participating Banks. The panel would be consisted of at least three (3) persons from the Bangladesh Bank.
The panel would be presided by a Deputy General Manager (DGM) and two (2) other members should be

--- Page 31 ---
30 | P a g e

from business team and ICT team of Bangladesh Bank. For co-ordination of arbitration each member bank
should nominate at least two officers at their end to act as primary and secondary contact points.

7.3. Lodgment of Arbitration

Any party wishing to lodge an arbitration case under these Rules shall file a written Notice of Reference
("the Notice of Arbitration") which shall include the followings:

1. A request that the dispute be referred to arbitration;
2. The names and addresses of the parties to the dispute;
3. The amount, time, date, instrument/reference number (and other relevant details) of the
transaction ;
4. A brief statement describing the nature and circumstances of the dispute and
5. The relief or remedy sought

The process of bringing a dispute to arbitration will begin with a written notice to the PSD as required by
these Rules shall be addressed to:-
The General Manager
Payment Systems Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka-1000.

7.4. Presentment of Arbitration:

Subject to the requirement, the Arbitration process would be fair and efficient and that all relevant
information would be properly considered. Arbitration proceedings shall follow the procedures as set out
hereunder-
A claimant serves a Notice of Reference to Arbitration upon a Respondent (s) in the prescribed
form or,
The parties to any dispute have jointly signed a reference indicating their intention that the dispute
be referred to Arbitration for resolution.
The endorsement of the Notice of Reference to Arbitration or the jointly signed reference and the
endorsement of any response shall state at the minimum the following particulars:
A statement of the claim made by the Claimant and/or a statement of the defence and counterclaim
of the Respondent as the case may be;
A statement of the facts surrounding the claim, defence or counterclaim as the case may be;
Identification of the documentary evidence sought to be relied upon and where practicable copies
of the documentary evidence should be appended to the Reference;
A statement of the BDT amount of damages or the relief sought;
Any other information or arguments that may be relevant.

The coordinator of the Arbitration Panel will transfer the request and the response to the members of the
panel in a “Dispute File” and will assign it a file number.

7.5. Convening the panel and inviting the parties

The Coordinator [as decided by the concerned department of Bangladesh Bank] will determine the time and
place for the panel to meet and will provide early notice of the meeting to the parties. In the case of an
agreed-upon panel, the Chairman of the panel has the authority to set the time and place of the panel‟s
meeting and to invite the parties.

7.6. Additional meeting of the panel

The panel will endeavor to decide the matter within one meeting. In special cases, when a decision cannot
be reached, the chairman of the panel will – prior to the conclusion of the first meeting – decide on an early
date for an additional meeting to complete the clarification. The number of additional meeting will be
decided by the chairman of the panel as it seems necessary.

--- Page 32 ---
31 | P a g e

7.7. The Dispute File

The dispute file organized by the Co-ordinator of the Arbitration Panel will have the following characters-
All the material brought before the panel will be contained in a Dispute File, which will also contain
the protocol of the panel meeting
ii.
The Chairman of the panel will see to it that a protocol is recorded which includes the main points
of the dispute, a summary of the arguments of each side, the conclusions of the panel and its
decision. The Coordinator will present a copy of the protocol to each side on request
iii.
The request and the response in the protocol or the Dispute File shall not include information that
violates banking confidentiality.

7.8. Record keeping:
For record keeping relating to complaints, banks are required to follow instructions stated in the BACPS
operating rules. However, CCTV footage is considered part of circumstantial evidence and it must be
retained at least for six (06) months. For complaints escalated to Courts, all the related evidences should be
retained till the final decision.

7.9. Decision/Award:
The decision shall be made promptly by the panel within stipulated time (mentioned in section of 7.1). The
panel need not state the reasons for the decision.
The panel may award simple or compound interest on any sum awarded at such rate or rates and in respect
of such period or periods ending not later than the date of the award as the panel considers just.
All awards must be issued through the Chairman. The panel must deliver to the Co-ordinator a number of
original copies of the decision sufficient for the parties and for filing purpose.
The Co-ordinator shall release the decision to the parties upon the full settlement of fees and expenses.
The award shall be final, binding and enforceable according to its terms and the parties undertake to carry
out the award without delay.

7.10. Acceptance of the panel’s decision
The member banks will accept the decision of the panel to which a dispute between them is brought for
clarification. Nonetheless, it is hereby clarified that the procedure in this section should not be viewed as
agreement to engage in legal clarification.

7.11. Additional clarification by a special panel
The decision of a panel is final. In special cases, which will be considered as exceptions, the Chairman of
the Panel will have the authority to bring a dispute for additional clarification before a special panel that he
will convene.
7.12. The procedures for discussion in the panel and for initiating clarification
The Chairman of the Panel has the authority to determine the panels' procedures for discussion and
additional procedures for bringing a dispute before a panel for discussion.

7.13. Costs:
The panel shall specify in the final meeting the costs of the arbitration and decide which party shall bear
them and in what proportion. The "costs of the arbitration" shall include:
The fees of the panel [for a single meeting it would be BDT 5,000.00] would be fixed by the
Bangladesh Bank from time to time;
ii.
The costs of expert advice or of other assistance rendered; and
iii.
All expenses which are reasonably incurred by the BB in connection with the arbitration.
The panel has power to order in its award, that all or part of the legal or other costs of one party shall be
paid by the other party. Such costs shall, unless the award otherwise fixes or directs, be taxable by the Co-
ordinator.

7.14. Proposals for changes in the rules
On the basis of its experience in arbitrating the disputes, each panel can propose changes in the Clearing
House rules to the payment Systems Department of Bangladesh Bank.

7.15. Publication of the highlights of the clarification
The Chairman of the Panel has the authority to publish the panel decisions.

--- Page 33 ---
32 | P a g e

7.16. Indemnification of Arbitration Panel
Where they can be deemed to be acting in good faith the members of the Arbitration Panel shall have no
liability whatsoever, whether for acts or omissions or with respect to any other matter, arising directly under
Arbitration. The parties to the Arbitration expressly agree to this and further expressly hereby agree to
indemnify the parties to be dispute of the Arbitration Panel and each of them and keep each of them
harmless from any and all claims, which could arise in connection therewith.



Dispute Resolution:




















Figure : Dispute Resolution Cycle

Dispute
identified
by/informed to
Bank `A'
Bank 'A' sent
written notice
to Bank 'B'
•[within 05 working
days]
Bank 'B'
responds to
Bank 'A' in
written
•[within 05 working
days]
Dispute
resolved
Dispute not resolved
Presenting bank will reverse the
settlement and send the proceeds to
the Paying bank upon the request
received (in case of possible fraud).
The participating bank individually or
jointly can send the notice of reference
for Arbitration (withing 15 working
days from the dispute identified)
An interim reply
will be sent to the
customer
• [within 05 working days]
Convene a
meeting with
Arbitration Panel
and both the
parties
• [within 10 working days]
Decision/Award

--- Page 34 ---
33 | P a g e















BACPS Operating Procedure

--- Page 35 ---
34 | P a g e

Chapter-1: OPERATIONAL OVERVIEW

1.1 Introduction
These operational procedures are intended for the use of operational staff within Participating Banks
engaged in the preparation and submission of Outward payment items to the Clearing House and in the
receipt and verification of Inward items from the Clearing House.
Here the document is a reference to additional documents which are generally technical in nature and
contain specific system details. These procedures deal mainly with the operational issues for image based
instrument processing and have to be read with and subject to the Bangladesh Payments and Settlement
Systems Regulation 2014, the BACPS Operating Rules or any other law(s) shall come into effect time to
time.

1.2 JURISDICTION

The image exchange cheque clearing process will be applicable for cheque clearing operation throughout
Bangladesh. Any bank that has been allowed to act as a member of the BACPS has to follow this process
for cheque clearing.
This document deals principally with the operational procedures for banks utilizing an automated image
based cheque clearing solution and has to be read with and are subject to the Bangladesh Payment and
Settlement Systems Regulation 2014.

1.3 CLEARING SESSIONS

The Cheque Truncation System is capable of supporting different types of clearing. Each type of clearing
will have a separate clearing window known as clearing sessions. Initially there will be three presentation
and three corresponding return clearing sessions (two for local currency and one for Foreign Currency)
per day. The presentment, return and settlement cut-offs for these sessions are:

Clearing Window
Cut Offs
Presentment
Return
Settlement
Regular Value Instrument
12:30 hrs
17:00 hrs
17:01 hrs
High Value Instrument
12.00 hrs
15.00 hrs
15.01 hrs
Foreign currency Instrument
12.00 hrs
15:00 hrs
15:01 hrs

Clearing sessions may be rescheduled and communicated to member banks by the Clearing House
(BACPS) authority from time to time. In case of High Value items, if presented after the presentment cut-
off and before the presentment cutoff of RV instruments, will be processed in the regular value session
(and follow the regular value timing for return and settlements) while HV items presented after RV
presentment cut-off will processed in next available HV session. In case of RV and Foreign Currency
session-missed items, the files will be processed in available corresponding sessions.

--- Page 36 ---
35 | P a g e

Chapter-2
OVERVIEW OF CLEARING PROCEDURE UNDER IMAGING AND
TRUNCATION ENVIRONMENT

2.1 TRUNCATION POINT

The presenting bank, on its own discretion decides about the point of truncation. A bank may have
multiple points of truncation but will have one single point of connection with BACPS which will be
termed as sending/receiving point. And the PBM will be located at this point. Nevertheless, the
bank must exhibit proper authorization process as well as ensure due diligence on all the
instruments presented as mentioned in Section 131 of the NI Act and Section 2.3.3 (Presenting
Bank's Responsibility) of this rule. Due care and secure handling is to be exercised in movement
of instruments from counters of the presenting bank to the point of truncation.

2.2 SETTLEMENT

Settlement shall be made on the basis of the electronic cheque data including the amount that
accompanies the image and that is contained in cheque return data. The specifications that qualify
cheques for image based clearing must be strictly adhered to.

2.3 DIGITAL SIGNATURES

The use of the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) will ensure data authenticity, integrity and non-
repudiation, adding strength to the entire system. The PBM of the presenting bank will affix digital
signature on each file from the sending point. The image and data must be secured using the PKI
throughout the entire transmission cycle between the presenting bank, the clearing house and the
paying bank. It is the responsibility of the presenting and paying banks to ensure that the
movement of electronic files from their host capturing systems to the PBM is secured with the
highest level. Access to the bank‟s PBM must be limited to authorized personnel only.

2.4 USE OF SECURE NETWORK

Participating Banks will ensure that, all electronic files will be duly validated, encrypted & digitally
signed, will travel over a secure communication link connecting each bank with the Clearing
House. All acknowledgement messages will be transmitted via the same link.


2.5 STORAGE AND ARCHIVING SYSTEM

A sound storage and archiving system of images is an integral part of BACPS which ensures that
all relevant data is immediately available to resolve disputes, complaints, reconciliation etc. The
physical instrument (truncated items) must be sequentially preserved for six (6) years by the
presenting bank and may (optionally) maintain an image archive for their items only.


The contents of the national archive shall be available to both the presenting and paying Bank for
12 years through online and offline access. Bangladesh Bank has the authority to decide the
timeline for both online and offline access. Any item processed by BACPS will be made available
to the parties of the transaction via the archive. Images in the central archive will be available for
viewing after the closing of the current business day.

--- Page 37 ---
36 | P a g e



2.6 SCANNING STANDARD

The scanning will conform to the prescribed standards which are bi-tonal (black and white), 200
DPI to 300 DPI TIFF format image. The image quality assurance is required at the scanning stage
so that the images meet the processing quality standards. The image specifications are:

Side No.
Image Type
Minimum DPI
Format
compression
Front Black & White
200-300 DPI
TIFF
CCITT G4
Reverse Black & White
200-300 DPI
TIFF
CCITT G4

The background of the cheques should be image-friendly; there should be no dark background.

--- Page 38 ---
37 | P a g e

Chapter-3
PRESENTMENT FOR CLEARING PROCEDURE AT THE PRESENTING BANK

3.1 PRESENTING BANKS DUE DILIGENCE REQUIREMENTS

As settlement will be done on the basis of data, conducting due diligence therefore is the
responsibility of the presenting bank to verify the prima facie genuineness of the cheque to be
truncated.
The banks should observe all precautions which a prudent banker takes under normal circumstances
with a view to employing suitable risk management techniques, it includes:
Enforcement of KYC (Know Your Customer) norms prescribed by Bangladesh Bank from
time to time;
Close monitoring of credits and debits of accounts based on risk categorization, including
new account alerts ;
Ensure that the physical feel of the instrument meets the paper and design standards used
for MICR cheques;
Check the apparent tenor of the instrument;
Detect and reject a cheque if any type of discoloration, material alteration or tampering is
visible to the naked eye ;
Examination under UV lamp to detect the tampering (attempt).
For enhanced attention, based on experience, the banks may deploy additional levels of
checking for high value and Foreign Currency instruments.
The presenting bank takes full responsibility for collecting on behalf of the intended payee and
exercises due diligence as per the conditions laid down in the Operating Procedure.

3.2 SORTING OF INSTRUMENT

Instruments that are drawn on the presenting bank itself (on us) should not be come to BACPS and
be settled internally. Apart from segregating “on-us” instruments, the presenting bank should also
segregate instruments according to their processing window (i.e. RV, HV and FC) and also
according to their presentment status (i.e. for first presentment through second re-presentment) as
well as any of the instruments which are torn and would require separate process of handling by the
bank. Foreign currency instruments will be sorted accordingly, i.e. segregation for different foreign
currency will be put in separated bundles.

3.3 STAMPING

Crossing will be allowed at the top left corner of the instrument without hampering the material part of
the instrument. All instruments received for collection over the bank‟s counters are required to be
branded on the rear (Bank/Branch of first deposit) of the instrument with the banks stamp prior to
scanning. The suggested dimension and the position of the stamp are given in back side of all
payment instruments. The beneficiary name and account number will have to be recorded on the
back side of the instrument (Payee area). The banks should take care so that the stamping may not
interfere with any material portion of the instrument. However, in an automated environment, the
machine endorsement serves the purpose of a stamp and therefore it is discouraged to not to return
an instrument only due to not having a stamp at the back. In case of placement of machine
endorsement especially for represented items the presenting bank should take care about the
placement of the lines so that those are not overlapped.

3.4 CAPTURE OF IMAGES AND DATA

The images of all instruments in a batch must be duly captured along with MICR data using
scanners setup for the purpose. The amount and necessary elements of MICR line needs to be
captured/keyed in to complete the data record. The ideal number of instruments in one batch should
be no more than 50 items; however smaller batches will improve the speed of balancing and the
bank should determine the ideal batch size for its own processing.

--- Page 39 ---
38 | P a g e


3.5 REJECT REPAIR AND BALANCING

The solutions adopted by the banks should have the capability of completing the routing number on
any item experiencing a MICR line misread. Repairing of up to three (03) digits of a MICR line is
allowed as long as they are located in different fields of the MICR line. If the number of MICR
misread is more than three (03) digits, the bank must refrain from sending that item to BACPS rather
may return the item to the presenter or send it to the paying bank directly on short collection basis.

All batches of items sent to the BACPS should be in a reconciled state i.e. the total of the debit items
matches the total shown on the Batch Control Voucher (BCV).

3.6 DIN (DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION NUMBER) ENDORSEMENT

At the time of scanning the instrument, the reader sorter/scanner will print a single line endorsement
on the back of each instrument which shall be the unique identifier for that instrument. It shall consist
of Presentment Date of the item (6 digit) in DDMMYY format, Item Sequence/Running Number (8
digit), Routing Number of the Branch of First Deposit (9 digit).
The application of the endorsement stamp and the printing of the DIN imply that the collecting bank
undertakes to credit the payee's account upon realization of the cheque and that the instrument
deposited is a genuine one and is being collected for a bona fide customer of the bank. Therefore,
either of these two (i.e. stamp or Endorsement Line) may serve the purpose and should not be
returned due to missing of one of these two.
As regards the confirmation/certification of endorsements, the member banks may be informed that
the clearing stamp affixed would be considered as the collecting banks' confirmation of all the
previous endorsements and that it undertakes to credit the beneficiaries' account on realization and
no additional/specific endorsement/certificate of confirmation to this effect on the instrument is
considered necessary.

3.7 REPRESENTED CHEQUES

Any item that is eligible for re-presentment may only be presented three times in total, the original
presentment and a maximum of two re-presentments. In the case of represented instruments the
endorsement will be made in a different position to avoid overlapping.
All unpaid items that are represented will be processed electronically and must be passed to the
BACPS in separate batches from normal outward clearing items. The capture systems would have
control procedures to monitor such representations. All unpaid items must have an assigned return
reason code (Annexure-2).
If an item fails to clear after reaching the maximum number of re-presentments (i.e. being re-
presented two times) the instrument is to be marked as „cancelled‟ and is to be returned to the
depositing customer.

3.8 VALIDATION

The data elements captured by the banks capture system will be validated by the presenting bank‟s
PBM before transmission to BACPS.

3.8 CLEARING INFORMATION SYNCHRONIZATION

The master table information, such as routing number, transaction code and calendar etc., of the
capture system should be synchronized with that of Clearing House Master Table. Master Table
Synchronization is an automated function between the Clearing House and the bank‟s PBM. Any
change in the clearing house table will be automatically updated online on the PBMs, and it shall be
the bank‟s responsibility to update its capture system immediately. PBM supervisors should monitor
whether the Clearing House Table has been updated successfully. Any error related to Clearing
House Table updates is reflected in the system monitor screen of the PBM.

--- Page 40 ---
39 | P a g e


3.10 IMAGE QUALITY CHECKING

The bank needs to perform IQA validation at the capture system. Each image shall have an IQA
indicator tag; this is a flag on the item record in the electronic envelope indicating the outcome of the
IQA test carried out by the capture system.

The threshold values for different IQA parameters are given in Active Image Clearing and Settlement
System Functional Specification. The bank should take care to synchronize the IQA parameters at
the capture system, to avoid excessive rejection at the PBM.

3.11 HANDLING IQA FAILURE

The member bank must ensure that its equipment meets the requirements of the IQA standards.
When items fail IQA standards, it will be the responsibility of the bank to ensure that the hardware is
repaired or collaborated to achieve the highest levels of performance. IQA failure is a hardware
performance issue and must be rectified without creating a burden on other BACPS participants.

3.12 PRESENTING BANKS SUBMITTING ELECTRONIC DATA AND IMAGES

The operational steps of item processing are noted as follows:

1. An instrument is accepted for depositing customer account by the presenting bank.

2. The instrument and optionally a deposit slip (associated) are passed for in house processing.

3. The bank manually endorses the rear of the instrument in the designated area with the Bank
stamp.

4. All instruments are retained at the presenting banks location of choice.

5. The front and rear images of the instrument and the MICR code line data are captured within
groupings referred to as batches.

6. At the point of cheque processing and scanning, the presenting bank‟s capture device will put an
endorsement line on the rear of the instrument (Please see section 3.3 for details )

7. All batches must be presented to the BACPS in a reconciled state i.e. the batch must contain a
batch total to which all instruments are balanced. Code line correction must have been carried
out to ensure that the routing number and transaction code are present and amount entry made
to assign an amount electronically to each instrument.

8. Batches must be packaged into an electronic files referred to as a Cheque Envelope [CE] in
accordance with the already published standard for presentation to the BACPS.

9. The presenting bank system will pass the CE, in this case referred to as an OCE (Outward CE),
to the PBM embedded within its own system for preliminary validation and transmission.

10. The PBM will validate the structure of the OCE and the contents of records within the OCE.

11. The PBM will reject, prior to transmission to the BACPS, any files failing validation.

12. Files passing validation will be encrypted and assigned a Digital Signature by the PBM indicating
the identity of the presenting bank.

13. Files will be passed from the PBM application via the banks own chosen communication link to
the BACPS.

--- Page 41 ---
40 | P a g e


3.13 FREQUENCY OF SUBMISSION

It is recommended that banks submit OCE files to the BACPS approximately in every 30 minutes,
unless the recommended maximum item count within a file of 50 items is reached sooner. It is also
recommended that banks submit most of the files 30 minutes before the published Cut-off time to
ensure receipt within the current clearing session.

3.14 ALTERNATIVE DELIVERY MEDIA

The PBM contains facility to write files to alternative media such as a CD or DVD. Files delivered by
a bank to the BACPS on this media will be accepted subject to the same acceptance criteria as files
received via a communications link.

3.15 ELECTRONIC FILES ACCEPTED BY THE BACPS

Files received at the BACPS will initially be validated by a version of the PBM titled the Clearing
House Module (CHM). This module will carry out structure and content validation and where no
failure is detected and the digital signature is verified the file will be accepted and decrypted.

Accepted files are passed to the BACPS where they are decrypted and repackaged to extract items
for distribution to any paying bank whose cheques are included in the file. When a file has been
accepted an acknowledgement message is sent to the presenting bank via the communications link
to confirm acceptance.

3.16 ELECTRONIC FILES NOT ACCEPTED BY THE BACPS

When electronic files are received by the BACPS they undergo processing similar to that carried out
at the PBM stage i.e. they are subjected to validation, confirmation of the digital signature assigned
and decrypted. If an item fails validation for any reason the file will be rejected and an
acknowledgment shall be issued and sent to the presenting bank via the communication link.

3.17 INTERNAL CONTROL

The banks should document the process flow and ensure that adequate control mechanisms are in
place. Special care and adequate quality controls should be in place during rescanning of
instruments and representation of instruments.

The banks must have a mechanism to generate internal control reports at the end of the session/day
to effectively reconcile the presentation made and the credit received by it from Clearing House. In
case of any discrepancy, the same should be sorted out immediately. The service branches of the
banks following distributed outward model may keep the branch clearing control reports for
verification of actual credit received from the Clearing House.

--- Page 42 ---
41 | P a g e



Chapter-4
PROCESSING AT PARTICIPATING BANK MODULE: OUTWARD
CLEARING

4.1 PARTICIPATING BANK MODULE (PBM)

The BACPS Participating Bank Module (PBM) provides cheque envelope validation and provides an
interface for sending and receiving cheque envelopes from and to BACPS.

4.2 DUPLICATION CHECKING

Any duplicate cheque envelope that is detected will be rejected in its entirety by the Clearing House.
A cheque envelope is considered a duplicate if the content of the following envelope header record
fields match a previously processed cheque envelope that does not have its resend indicator set to
„Y‟ (Please ref 2.2.3of AICS spec):

Destination Routing Number

Origin Routing Number

File Creation Date

File Creation Time

File ID Modifier

All duplicate items detected during Clearing House processing will be rejected.

4.3 RECEIVING OUTWARD PRESENTMENT

The PBM will receive the duly balanced outward clearing files containing cheque image and
electronic data from the capture system of the bank.

4.4 IMAGE QUALITY ANALYSIS AND FAILURE HANDLING

All outward images are subjected to IQA validations. Any image failing IQA validation will result in
the rejection of the cheque envelope by the presenting bank PBM with an appropriate response file.
The bank may rescan and resubmit as many times as is necessary to meet the IQA requirements.


4.4 ITEM PROCESSING

The outward cheque envelopes presented by the capture system are validated by the PBM against
the validation property indicated in the PBM Specifications. The PBM after validation generates
response files which contain information related to acceptance or rejection of each file and the items
present in each file with appropriate reason codes.

4.5 SESSION ATTACHMENT

The items are assigned to an appropriate clearing sessions that is open based on parameters fixed
for a session by the Clearing House. These parameters are passed on to the capture system through
the PBM. The item inherits „session date‟ that is the business date of the session and session type
(i.e. Regular, High value and FC). If there is no appropriate session that is open, the items/bundles
wait at the PBM until such a session opens.

--- Page 43 ---
42 | P a g e




4.6 USE OF PKI

Bangladesh Bank is in the process of establishing a Certification Authority (CA) under the national
certification authority. Until, the process is established, Bangladesh Bank will continue to run the
proprietary CA for BACH operation.

4.7 Regional Holiday and Blockage

Blockage and Holiday Marking function in the system has been designed to handle different holidays,
for a `value date'. The blockage prevents other banks to present any cheques on the branch/bank
put under blockage. In addition, it gives extension to all unexpired items drawn on such branches
and banks for the blockage period. The branches/banks under blockage cannot lodge any fresh
presentation during the blockage period. Banks seeking to block their branches or the entire bank
may request the CH for its approval. This functionality may also be extended to address other
operational situations as deemed necessary by CH.


4.8 RECONCILIATION OF OUTWARD PRESENTATION

After End of Session at the Clearing House, BACPS generates consolidated net settlement report
and member bank net settlement report containing the details of items those have been accepted for
settlement at the Clearing House. It shall be the responsibility of presenting bank to reconcile their
entire presentation by collating the information from these reports.

--- Page 44 ---
43 | P a g e

CHAPTER-5
PROCESSING AT PARTICIPATING BANK MODULE: INWARD CLEARING

5.1 RECEIPT OF INWARD DATA/IMAGES

The inward processing deals with accepting inward presentment data and images from the Clearing
House and providing data in the form of files for use within the (paying) bank‟s in-clearing system. The
PBM will receive digitally signed inward electronic data and image exchange files from the Clearing
House.

5.2 VALIDATION

The PBM shall authenticate and load the exchange file data into the system. The PBM will send an
acknowledgement exchange file to the Clearing House if the inward data exchange file or image
exchange file is accepted.

5.3 CONTROL MECHANISM

The receiving point should verify that all the inward bundles/items have been received by it to ensure that
there is no data loss in the transmission from clearing house to the PBM. The PBM supervisor shall
compare the relevant information available from the „clearing house processing monitor‟ and „inward
exchange file screen‟ for this purpose. The paying bank will not be able to generate posting files unless all
the inward bundles/items have been actually received at the PBM.

If any file is lost in transmission the bank may request the Clearing House for retransmission of
images/data.

--- Page 45 ---
44 | P a g e


CHAPTER 6

PROCESSING AT BRANCHES/BANK’S IN CLEARING SYSTEM


6.1 DUPLICATION CHECKING

The Cheque Processing System itself detects duplicate items based on MICR code line on the data
for the configured number of days. The duplicate items are indicated in the Exceptions Report
generated by the presenting bank's CPS and it is the responsibility of Presenting Bank CPS to have
processes in place to take necessary caution/control while processing such items.

6.2 DIGITAL CERTIFICATE VALIDATION

PBM shall verify the digital certificate of CHM. Whereas it has been made mandatory for presenting
banks to apply digital signatures at the capture point itself.

6.3 PAYMENT PROCESSING

The paying bank shall do the payment processing based on image and electronic data of the
instruments following all the prudent practices including signature verification, account balance
verification, verification of endorsements etc.

6.4 RETURNED CHEQUES

Items that fail paying bank approval and are therefore not to be honoured, are required to be
returned to the BACPS in electronic format as defined in the AICS specification within the stipulated
return period. For return items the image is not to be included in the return item file.

It will be the responsibility of the paying banks in-clearing system to collate all the return items from
different branches and create Outward Return Envelope (ORE) as per specifications provided in
AICS specifications document. The paying banks‟ in-clearing system shall put such OREs to PBM for
onward transmission to BACPS.

Returned items are to be marked with the appropriate return reason code from the list published by
Bangladesh Bank which is attached at Annexure 2.

Return item files are to be transmitted to the BACPS via the paying bank PBM where the files will be
validated, encrypted and digitally signed and sent to the Clearing House provided they meet the
necessary validation criteria.

Invalid files will be rejected by the PBM for correction by the paying bank.

Return item files received by the BACPS will be validated and an acknowledgment shall be issued to
the generating bank indicating their acceptance or rejection.

Return items accepted by the BACPS will be passed to the presenting bank and an appropriate
posting made to the settlement system.

Any item not received by the BACPS within the stipulated return period will be deemed to have been
accepted by the paying bank.

Any return item not received by the BACPS within the stipulated time period will be treated as an
honored item and accordingly the settlement files will be prepared and posted. If the paying bank
detects such item which misses the return cutoff then the paying bank will have to contact directly
with the presenting bank and they may resolve the issue outside BACPS framework.

--- Page 46 ---
45 | P a g e



6.5 EXTENSION REQUEST FOR RETURNS

A paying bank can request an extension on the return period for a branch/bank by applying to the General
Manager of the Payment Systems Department of Bangladesh Bank. Depending on the severity of the
situation Bangladesh Bank may grant extension as per the request. On grant of extension to a
bank/branch, the clearing length of all the items drawn on it would correspondingly increases by the
extension hours. Extension can be requested by the senior level official i.e. Deputy Managing Director
(DMD) of the paying banks before the session closure.

6.6 REQUESTS FOR PAPER

As per Regulations 9 (iii) of Bangladesh Payment and Settlement Systems Regulations, 2014 and
the BACPS Operating Rules, the paying bank may, request a physical instrument from the
presenting bank; if it believes that the item is not genuine or has questions about its validity.


6.7 INTERNAL CONTROL

In addition to the inward instruments drawn on branches of a bank, the reports generated by the
Clearing House would contain the summary position of the total number of instruments and the total
value thereof.

6.8 RECONCILIATION OF CLEARING DIFFERENCES

In BACPS clearing, the image and data will be received in separate files that are linked and hence
the possibility of a bank being debited without receiving an image shall not arise. In the case of a
bank receiving cheques of another bank (due to a data entry error or so) the item should immediately
be returned to the BACPS with appropriate return reason code.

In case of a cheque listed for a value different from the actual value of the cheque (due to a data
entry error), the cheque should also be returned with the` incorrect amount' return reason code.

--- Page 47 ---
46 | P a g e

CHAPTER 7


7.1 SPECIFICATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC EXCHANGE OF CHEQUES

The following section describes the types of Electronic Cheque Envelopes (ECE). The
specifications are incorporated into the BACPS Rules and reflected in the Active Image Clearing
Specifications.

The Electronic Cheque Envelope (ECE) currently identified are as follows:

Outward Electronic Cheque Envelope (OCE)
Outward Return Electronic Cheque Envelope(ORE)
Inward Electronic Cheque Envelope (ICE)
Inward Return Electronic Cheque Envelope (IRE)
Archive Electronic Cheque Envelope (ACE)

7.2 ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE

The Electronic Cheque Envelope encapsulates outward clearing items, inward clearing items,
return items and acknowledgments. The specifications for all electronic cheque envelopes are
contained in the AICS.


7.3 OUTWARD ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE

The Outward Cheque Envelope is generated by the presenting bank in accordance with AICS. It
encapsulates the outward clearing items for that bank that are to be distributed as Inward
Clearing to the issuing banks for each item.

7.4 OUTWARD RETURN ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE

The Return Cheque Envelope (ORE) is generated by the paying bank in accordance with AICS.
It has the same fundamental structure and format as the OCE.

7.5 INWARD ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE

Inward Electronic Cheque Envelopes (ICE) are generated in accordance with AICS. They have
the same structure and format as Outward Electronic Cheque Envelopes; however, Inward
Electronic Cheque Envelopes are Bank-specific and only contain Cheque Detail Records for a
single Bank, the paying Bank for those cheques.

7.6 INWARD RETURN ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE

Inward Return Electronic Cheque Envelopes (IRE) are generated in accordance with AICS. They
have the same structure and format as the Outward Return Electronic Cheque Envelopes;
however, Inward Return Electronic Cheque Envelopes are presenting Bank-specific and only
contain return data records for cheques they presented and are now being returned. No Image is
returned.

7.7 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ELECTRONIC CHEQUE ENVELOPE

The Acknowledgement Electronic Cheque Envelope is generated by member Banks. It has the
same structure and format as Outward Electronic Cheque Envelopes; however, the
Acknowledgement Electronic Cheque Envelope only contains Cheque Detail Records for
cheques issued by that Bank. The items presented in Acknowledgement Electronic Cheque
Envelopes are intended solely for archive and will not contribute in any way to the clearing and
settlement process.

7.8 ONLINE INQUIRY:
An archive is maintained in the BACPS for all the payment instruments cleared through the
system. Member banks can trace any cheque transactions previously occurred through the
`Online Inquiry ' window of the BACPS.

--- Page 48 ---
47 | P a g e

Annexure 1


PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT FOR BANGLADESH AUTOMATED CHEQUE PROCESSING
SYSTEM (BACPS) & BANGLADESH ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER NETWORK (BEFTN)
(on TK. 300 Non-Judicial Stamp)

This agreement is made on the date of ----th ---- of 20-- between Bangladesh Bank (BB,
hereinafter referred to as the “Central Bank of Bangladesh”) and . . . . . . . . Bank LTD
(hereinafter referred to as the “Participating Banking Company”).

In consideration of the undersigned being admitted as a Participating Banking Company in the
Bangladesh Automated Clearing House (BACH) constituting Bangladesh Automated Cheque
Processing System (BACPS) and Bangladesh Electronic Funds Transfer Network (BEFTN) of
the BB providing settlement and other services and of the mutual indemnification of the
undersigned by each other Participating Banking Company of BACPS and BEFTN. The
undersigned, which intends to act as a Participating Banking Company of BACPS and BEFTN
hereby agrees with the BB, and with each other Participating Banking Company:

1. to comply with and be subject to the BACPS Operating Rules and Procedures (collectively
referred to as the "BACPS Rules") and BEFTN Operating Rules (collectively referred to as
the "BEFTN Rules") including descriptive requirements, as in effect from time to time;
2. to make all payments in time required by the BACPS Rules and BEFTN Rules including fees
and charges set by BB from time to time;
3. to comply with all directions/guidelines issued by BB from time to time for smooth operation
of BACH and national interest;
4. to indemnify and hold harmless the BB and each other Participating Banking Company from
any and all costs, charges, claims, demands, expenses (including costs of investigation and
attorneys' fees and expenses of litigation), losses, liabilities, damages, judgments, fines,
penalties, interest, and amounts paid in settlement (each referred to herein as a "cost")
arising from any failure on the part of the undersigned to exercise ordinary care or to comply
with any of the provisions of the BACPS Rules and BEFTN Rules;
5. to comply with decision of the arbitration panel formed in BB to which a dispute between
member banks (Participating Banking Company) are brought for resolution;
6. to accept the instruction of suspension either temporary or permanently from the operation of
BACH by BB due to noncompliance of the instruction/guidelines/rules of BB for the
continuous and smooth operation of BACH.

This agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the People‟s
Republic of Bangladesh.

This agreement shall be binding on the undersigned and its successors and assigns, except no
Participating Banking Company may transfer or assign its rights or obligations hereunder except
as expressly provided in the BACPS Rules and BEFTN Rules.

Date
(Participating Banking Company)


By:
Title:


(Signature)


Accepted this _____________________________ day of _____________, _______
Bangladesh Bank:

By:
Title:


(Signature)

--- Page 49 ---
48 | P a g e


Annexure 2: Return Reason Codes


CODE
REASON
RE-PRESENTABLE (R)
NON RE-PRESENTABLE (N)


Insufficient fund
Amount in figure and word differs
Stale Cheque
Post Dated Cheque/Undated Cheque
Drawers signature differs/Missing
Payment stopped by Drawer
Item represented too often/More than 03 times
Incomplete or missing endorsement
Forged endorsement
10.
Material alteration-Payee
name/Amount/Date/Account Number
11.
Forged or unauthorized signature
12.
Missing Corporate Stamp
13.
Incorrect Amount/Cheque Number/ Account
Number
14.
Item sent to the wrong bank/branch
15.
Account Closed/Dormant/Blocked
16.
Advice not received
17.
Duplicate Item-Previously Paid
18.
Incorrect Payee(Mismatch with advice)
19.
High value item presented to an ineligible
branch
20.
Cheque not Activated/Intimation not received
21.
Cheque and Advice Data Mismatch
22.
07 (seven) Days Notice Required
23.
Test key required/differs
24.
Not Arranged for/Credit Limit Exceed
25.
Revenue Stamp Required/Not Sufficient
26.
Signature and Seal Required on the Stamp
27.
Budget Required/ Refer to the Issuer
28.
Item Required Re-validation
29.
MICR Data and Image Mismatch