--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bb.org.bd

Sustainable Finance Department Ge
Bangladesh Bank * a | vo
Head Office / i
Dhaka

9 January 2022

SFD Circular No. 01 Date : ------------------------
25 Poush 1428

Managing Directors/Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility for Banks and Financial Institutions

Please refer to GBCSRD Circular No. 7 dated 22 December 2014, SFD Circular Letter No. 3
dated 16 June, 2020 and. time to time other circular/circular letters/instructions issued from
Bangladesh Bank on CSR.

Please find enclosed Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility for Banks and
Financial Institutions which is being issued vide this circular under the authority given through

Section 45 of Bank Company Act, 1991 and Section 18 (Cha) of Financial Institutions Act, 1993.

These policy guidelines will come into force with immediate effect.

Yours sincerely,
Enclosure: As stated

(Khondkar Morshed Millat)
General Manager
Phone: 9530320
Email: morshed.millat@bb.org.bd

--- Page 2 ---
Policy Guidelines
on
Corporate Social Responsibility for
Banks and Financial Institutions

Sustainable Finance Department
Bangladesh bank

January 2022

Team Approach
Team Leader

Khondkar Morshed Millat, General Manager

Sustainable Finance Department
Team Members

Md Salah Uddin, Deputy General Manager
Sustainable Finance Department
Rabeya Khandaker, Joint Director
Sustainable Finance Department

Ahmed Zubear Mahbub, Joint Director
Sustainable Finance Department

--- Page 3 ---
Table of Contents

Topics Page
1, [100100001017.....১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ 1
2. CSR - Vision and 10155101....................১,০০০০০০০০০০০০ 2
3. CSR- 199517101010.....,-5555555555555555555555555557555555555555555550 2
4. Objectives Of 097২.......,১,,০০55৮০5০55০5555৮555৮৮০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৮০০০১০ ০ 2
5. CSR Alignment with SDGs and বা )0,......১::.,১১,০০০০০০০০০ি 2-3
6. Scope of CSR (sectors and sub-sectOrs).....ccccssssscsssesseecesssessesseesesessesssssesscsaeessees 4-8
7. Screening Process of CSR £১০0%10195........১.5১555555555555 9
8. Financial Inclusion 01006109]২,,..,,,০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৪০০০০০০০০০০০৪০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০ 9
9. Socially Responsible Financing (SRF) under 09.............,০,০০,,,,০০০০০,০০০০০০০১, 9
10. Women 1211090/500060....০,০,০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৪০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১ 10
11.Special [119000610109..,.-০০5555555555০০০০০২১২০২২০২০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০ 10
12.Prohibition in CSR 4১০1%1099,,,০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৮০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০২০০৪০০০০০০০০০০০০১১১০০, 11
13.Budgetary Allocation Process and Administrative Set [00...........,০০০০০০০০০১৬ 11
14.Monitoring of CSR /১০0%1093,,,,,,০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১০০০০০০১০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০১৭ 12
15. Reporting and 19190199016. .......০.০০,০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০০৭ 13

৬ 13

--- Page 4 ---
Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

. Introduction:

Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is now being considered as an acceptable tool all over the
world to promote equitable and sustainable development, maintain consistent higher growth of
the economy, decrease the inequality of a society and mitigate environmental degradation.
Bangladesh Bank (BB), the Central Bank of Bangladesh is mandated to ensure responsible
behavior of social, environmental, governance and economic sectors in a structured manner. In
these context Banks and Financial institutions (FIs) being involved in their CSR activities are
also aligned in maximizing their values through better risk management, employee loyalty and
reputation. According to BB’s strategic planning there is a time bound action plan for the
implementation of effective CSR Policy Guidelines of Banks and Financial Institutions. As such,
BB sets areas or initiatives in CSR activities directly/indirectly linked to the development
priorities in national and international plans adopted by the Government of Bangladesh; such as
Perspective Plan of Bangladesh(2021-2041), Government 8th Five Year Plan, National
Sustainable Development Strategy, National Social Security Strategy (NSSS) of Bangladesh,
Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan, National Agricultural Policy, Intended
Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC), National Disaster Management Policy 2015,
National Financial Inclusion Strategy, UN declared Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

In 2008, Bangladesh Bank initiated the mainstreaming of CSR activities in the financial sector.
These initiatives have inspired banks and financial institutions directly and indirectly to promote
various activities, e.g. relief and supportive programs for disaster management, working in areas
like health and education, environmental decay-resistant ‘greening’ programs etc. These
initiatives have also inspired increasing the depth and diversity of CSR engagements of banks
and FIs, both in direct budgetary expenditure and in financial inclusion drives, in greening of
their internal practices and processes and lending to environmentally benign projects. On the
other hand, these increasing levels of financial involvement in CSR activities have raised
concerns about the proper allocation of CSR budgets, insider interests and proper monitoring of
fund usage. Considering all these issues, indicative guidelines on CSR programs of banks and
FIs were issued by BB on 22 December, 2014.

Considering recent financial developments and changes in the global economy, it is high time to
generalize, emphasize and organize CSR activities for the environmental, social, equitable and
sustainable development of the country. International guidelines/principles (Equator principles,
UNGC, ISO-26000, ILO, SDGs-2030 and GRI), existing CSR strategies, policies, and
procedures have been taken into due consideration in preparing this new guidelines for Banks
and FIs for the smooth functioning of their CSR activities in a structured and effective manner.
This guideline incorporates all the instructions issued from time to time in line with the said
national and global standard issues which will enable Banks and FIs to contribute in the manner
that it demands in a wider range of scopes. f

1|Page

--- Page 5 ---
Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

. CSR - Vision and Mission

The main vision of CSR initiatives is to protect, preserve and uphold the basic rights of the
underprivileged/non-privileged/distressed/helpless/marginal/hardcore poor and socially
backwards sections of the population with a view to eliminating all forms of poverty and
inequality from the society ensuring that no one should left behind.

BB’s formation and supporting measures are to address vulnerable groups ingraining a socially
responsible financing ethos that plays the key role in drawing all banks and financial institutions
into spontaneous engagements in their CSR initiatives.

. CSR- Definition:

There is no universally established definition of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).
Mentionable, banking sector differs a bit from other economic sectors with respect to CSR
practices. CSR is generally understood as the "Triple Bottom Line Framework" in the areas of
economic, environmental, and social practices fulfilling stakeholder expectations. Analyzing
various national and international views and ideas for banks and FIs, CSR may be defined as
follows:

CSR is both short and long term time bound strategy to achieve a balance of economic,
environmental and social imperatives (Triple Bottom Line Approach). CSR is not only
philanthropic but also address the key sustainable development challenges through actionable
programs and community investments to a considerable extent. CSR to reduce all forms of
poverty, inequality, social exclusion, improve the quality food, healthcare availability and living
standards of vulnerable groups of the society for the sustainable and equitable development of
the country.

. Objectives of CSR:

With a view to fulfilling the mission and vision, BB has intended to set subsidized priority sector
lending in the areas of agriculture, CMSME and green finance. Furthermore, BB’s focus on the
underdeveloped regions/groups of hills, haors and coastal areas, vulnerable groups of
indigenous/tribal people, third gender/transgender, persons with disabilities, street urchins,
women facing gender discrimination and harassment. BB also intends to cover all the areas of
the country by CSR activities. In this context, Banks and FIs must play the vital role by
enhancing CSR support to vulnerable groups of rural and urban for socio economic development.

. CSR Alignment with SDGs and INDC

Bangladesh has already paved the way ahead of SDGs localization and implementation. The
responsibilities of ministries and agencies against each goal and target of the 2030 agenda have
been mapped out. Bangladesh is also one of the signatories which outlined what post-2020
climate actions they intended to take as part of INDCs under Paris Agreement. Accordingly, the £

2|Page

--- Page 6 ---
Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

sectors of CSR expenditure and target beneficiaries under this policy have been aligned with
relevant goals and targets of SDGs and INDC’s commitment of Bangladesh in the following

manner:
৪7৫ SDGs CSR Target Beneficiaries INDC Priority
Targets expenditure Area
1 Seven ian 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, | 1. Education . Vulnerable and
55) 1.4, 1.5, 1.8) | 2. Health undernourished men,
2.1, 2.3, 3.1, | 3. Income- women and children of
G00 WEALTH gua 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, generating all ages living in
| 3.8, 3.b, 3.9 Activities poverty line
ই 3.0, 4.1, 4.2, | 4. Infrastructure . Under privileged
4.3, 4.4, 4.5, Development students, street
5 toute [০0027 | 4.6, 4.8, children
Ss পু 4.b,5.1, 5.3, . Indigenous _ peoples,
5.5, 5.6, 5.a, family farmers,
5.b, 9.1, pastoralists and fishers
. Unemployed youth and
adults
aN | 6.1, 6.2, 7.1, | 5. Climate . Climate vulnerable
০ 7291, Change and coastal women, | Energy and
ee ae ee children and old | Cross-cutting
Se Coad | 14,7, 15.1, 7771 72877
i : ple living in | mitigation and
ee Hd 15251553) 6. Disaster ] inf [71
AGES Wah Management 3 ae informal | adaptation
13198 141 7. Green SRF sett ements, remote
eee area, hill tracts and
<—> islands
. Climate refuges
তো | 1.1, 1.3, 3.4, | 8. Financial . Students, — unskilled
3.6, 1.4, 4.1, Inclusion and unemployed
4.4, 4.6, 5.1, | 9. Sports and women and youths,
5.a, 11.4 Culture

. CMSMEs,

pensioners and old
age people

micro-
merchants and low-
income households,
freelancers,
migrants.

3|Page

--- Page 7 ---
Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

. Scope of CSR (sectors and sub-sectors):

Sustainable CSR programs need to be structured in such a manner where sustainability is the key
factor to address both project and event. Banks and FIs can execute their CSR programs through
social sustainable events and projects. The focus should be more on projects on long term rather
than short term events.

CSR expenditure for Banks and FIs covers sectors like education, health, environment, climate
change mitigation and adaptation, income-generating activities for the underprivileged
population, disaster management, infrastructure development, sports, culture and others.

6.1 Education:

Banks and FIs should spend minimum 30% of their total CSR expenditure for education
sector that includes:

6.1.1 Scholarships/stipends for students from low-income families in academic and vocational
training institutions (selection processes for scholarships and stipends should elicit
enough information to preclude applicants from drawing benefits from multiple
banks/financial institutions);

6.1.2 Support towards the upgrading of facilities in academic and technical/vocational training
institutions substantially engaged with the students and the trainees from underprivileged
rural and urban population;

6.1.3 Job focused vocational training in widening advancement opportunities for the
underprivileged population;

6.1.4. Support towards mentally/physically challenged/blind children’s education to prevent
dropout;

6.1.5 Scholarships/stipends for employee’s children and training/awareness programs for
harassment prevention in own institutions;

6.1.6 To set up libraries for spreading knowledge and education all over the country;

6.1.7 To set up ICT and science laboratories for schools/colleges in underprivileged and remote
areas to build up an advanced nation;

6.1.8 Awareness raising program for child abuse, early marriage, human trafficking, sanitary
hygiene etc.; '

6.1.9 Financial literacy related programs;

6.1.10 Related Research Issues;

6.1.11 Any others deem fit by BB. A

4|Page

--- Page 8 ---
Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

6.2 Health:

Banks and FIs should spend minimum 30% of their total CSR expenditure for health
sector that includes:

6.2.1 Preventive and curative healthcare support assistance for the underprivileged population;

6.2,2 Assistances including direct grants towards costs of curative treatment of poor vulnerable
individual patients for expensive treatments (e.g. cancer, kidney disease, heart disease,
liver disease, accidental operation, fire burn, acid burn, cataract eye operation, etc);

6.2.3 Costs of running hospitals and diagnostic centers engaged substantially in the treatment
of patients from the underprivileged population;

6.2.4 Costs of preventive public health and hygiene initiatives like provision of safe drinking
water, hygienic toilet facilities for poor households and for the floating population in
urban areas;

6.2.5 Costs of preventive public health for combating pandemics and epidemics like COVID-
19, SARS, AIDS, dengue, malaria, and other fatal diseases;

6.2.6 Reducing child mortality and improving maternal health by providing quality hospital
facilities and low-cost medicines;

6.2.7 Supporting welfare organizations for the well being of mentally/physically challenged
people;

6.2.8 Health services to the poor and helpless elderly/old age people;

6.2.9 Medical facilities for their employees and their dependents who are not at the executive
level;

6.2.10 Safety and wellness initiatives for their employees;

6.2.11 Related Research Issues;

6.2.12 Any others deem fit by BB.

6.3 Environment and Climate Change Mitigation & Adaptation:

Climate change is a global phenomenon. It is a serious risk to poverty alleviation and threatens to
undo decades of developmental efforts. The adverse effects of climate change already evident
with natural disasters are becoming more frequent and more devastating. Especially, people from
developing countries are more vulnerable to these phenomena because of their high dependence
on natural resources and their limited capacity to cope with climate variability and extremes.
Bangladesh is one of the most vulnerable countries in the world which faces the adverse impacts
of global warming and climate change. Health, energy, water supply, sanitation, industry (mining
and construction), transport, trade, tourism, agriculture, forestry, fisheries, environmental
protection & ecosystem, goods & services and food security are the key development sectors of
the country directly affected by climate change. Bangladesh Bank and other Banks/Fls are trying
to participate actively in an environment-friendly economy to protect the environment due to
rapid climate change. In this context, BB is probably the first central bank to initiate green
banking activities by promoting environment-friendly practices and reducing carbon emissions
through banking activities. %

5|Page

--- Page 9 ---
6.4

Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

Banks and FIs should spend minimum 20% for Environment and Climate change
mitigation & adaptation sector of their total CSR expenditure that includes:

6.3.1 River/canal/wetland de-silting;

6.3.2. Embankments/polders/submersible dykes;

6.3.3 Urban drainage/storm sewerage;

6.3.4 Solar Energy/power plants;

6.3.5 Roads, bridges/culverts in vulnerable areas;

6.3.6 Housing/cluster villages/growth centers;

6.3.7 Cyclone shelters/flood shelters;

6.3.8 Strengthening embankment systems along coastal zones;

6.3.9 Sandwich Panels for the coastal inhabitants;

6.3.10 Assistance for the affected fishermen;

6.3.11 Assistance for livestock sector;

6.3.12 Maintaining and constructing cyclone shelters and climate-proof housing;

6.3.13 Adaptation in the health sector (i.e. implementing surveillance systems for existing and
new disease risks);

6.3.14 Implementing pure drinking water and sanitation programs in areas at risk from climate
change and disaster-prone areas;

6.3.15 Developing efficient water irrigation and water management systems;

6.3.16 Promoting diversified crop production;

6.3.17 Coastal forestation and tree plantation;

6.3.18 Climate change related research work;

6.3.19 Any others deem fit by BB.

Income-generating Activities:

Banks and FIs may spend on the basis of the requirements that it demands. This sector includes:

6.4.1 Forming the farmers group. Assistance for farmer’s access to better technology in the
fields of crop diversification, livestock, fisheries, and poultry;

6.4.2. Creating new job opportunities, self-employment, and skill development programs for
youth;

6.4.3 Helping the youth to participate in national social service programs;

6.4.4 Supply of equipment to train the youth for self-employment;

6.4.5 Support towards blind people with equipments for self-employment;

6.4.6 Food, shelter and on-hands training to helpless, orphans, blind, physically challenged and
old aged people;

6.4.7 Training and capacity building initiatives for distressed, vagabond, handicapped, and
homeless people;

6.4.8 Related research issues;

6.4.9 Any others deem fit by BB. A

6|Page

--- Page 10 ---
6.5

6.6

Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

Disaster Management:

Disaster management has become an integral part of sustainable development. Disaster
management activities can be referred to as mitigation/prevention, preparedness, response and
recovery. Banks and FIs may spend on the basis of the requirements that it demands. This sector
includes:

6.5.1 Providing financial assistance to those organizations which are involved in disaster
management activities;

6.5.2 Awareness building programs for disaster management (seminars, workshops,
advertisements, leaflets, booklets, etc.);

6.5.3 Training for human resource development to ensure disaster management efficiently;

6.5.4 Emergency disaster relief (for losses in flood, cyclone, tornado, tidal bore, earthquake,
landslide, fire burn, extreme cold, drought, heavy rainfall, sudden river erosion, etc.);

6.5.5 Upgrading facilities and lifesaving equipment in emergency rescue services (fire
brigades, coast guards, etc.);

6.5.6 Related research issues;

6.5.7 Any others deem fit by BB.

Infrastructure Development:

Infrastructure development is essential for faster economic growth and sustainable development.
Infrastructure development for disadvantaged communities in remote areas should have the
priority. Banks and FIs may spend on the basis of the requirements that it demands. This sector
includes:

6.6.1 Establishment of school buildings for vulnerable groups, libraries, children’s parks,
playgrounds, recreation centers, and cultural centers (related to art, music, dance, painting
etc.);

6.6.2 Development of village market infrastructure for better marketing of local agro-products;

6.6.3 Solar power generation project and bio-gas generation project in remote areas;

6.6.4 Establishment of infrastructure/shed/building for cottage and micro product clusters;

6.6.5 Infrastructure development for the tourism sectors in promising areas;

6.6.6 Infrastructure development/maintenance and operational cost for old age
homes/orphanage;

6.6.7 Establishment/maintenance and operational cost of daycare centers;

6.6.8 Related research issues;

6.6.9 Any others deem fit by BB. hk

7[ Page

--- Page 11 ---
6.7

6.8

Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

Sports and Culture:

Banks and FIs may spend to promote artistic, cultural, literary, sports and recreational facilities
for the underprivileged, sports and cultural development in remote/underprivileged areas as part
of their CSR activities on the basis of the requirements that it demands. This sector includes:

6.7.1
6.7.2

6.7.3

6.7.4

6.7.5

6.7.6

6.7.7

6.7.8

6.7.9

6.7.10

Providing necessary funds for assisting domestic nonprofit events/projects;

Providing financial assistance for arranging training/sports materials for players in
group/individual in rural areas;

Providing financial assistance for reconstruction and preservation of our national
heritage;

Providing financial assistance for arranging folk culture (jatra, drama, jarigaan, palagaan,
gambhira, folksongs, dance etc.) and traditional sports (nouka-baich, latthi khela, kusti
etc.);

Financial assistance for arranging various indoor and outdoor sports competitions like
football, volleyball, cricket, hockey, ha-du-du, kabadi, chess, swimming, etc. in rural
areas;

Financial assistance for the vulnerable players or really deserving ones having serious
injury. This assistance will also be applicable for trainers, teachers, writers, poets,
singers, social workers, sports organizers as well as reputed persons from various
recognized occupations;

Allocating CSR funds to the organizations who are working on nurturing and blooming
of the country’s history, tradition, culture, Liberation War-related publications,
awakening the spirit of the Liberation War and organizing related programs;

Operating expenses, development and maintenance costs of museums and libraries for the
public interest etc.;

Providing funds for contemporary research works and projects taken on Bengali literature
and language and others;

Any others deem fit by BB.

Other Sectors (if any):

Apart from the sectors mentioned above, Banks and FIs may provide CSR assistance if they feel
that a person/institution/entity (PM office, Government organization etc.) is eligible to get a
grant from CSR programs. This sort of CSR grants will be recognized and reported in other

sector.

Such expenditure must be fully and specifically disclosed in applicable sector-wise CSR

allocation (as mentioned above) along with the supporting documents in the statements/reports
submitted to Bangladesh Bank. hk

8[ Page

--- Page 12 ---
Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

Screening process of CSR activities:

CSR program of Banks/FIs must move on through screening process to perform proper CSR
fund management and accrue positive performances. Banks/FIs should maintain the screening
process as under:

screening
process

The
verification

and
assessment of
the purpose

Fund
requirement/b
udget
estimation

Any others (if
due necessary)

Concern area

Identifying the |)
selection

target group

Financial Inclusion under CSR:

Bangladesh Bank and Financial Institutions Division of Ministry of Finance developed National
Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) approved by the Cabinet in May 2021 with a view to
ensuring country’s inclusive growth. Banks and FIs may extend their CSR activities integrating
financial inclusion strategic goals and targets.

Following financial inclusion activities will be included in the CSR of Banks and FIs:

e Cost borne by banks for “No-frill Accounts” for student accounts, marginal farmers and
workers of Readymade Garments (RMGs);

e Financial assistance to inhabitants of backward zone like hills, haors, enclaves of
Bangladesh for betterment of their living standard/livelihood;

e Assistance to promote MFS in remote areas;

e Financial assistance for education of street urchin/working children/technical education/
financial literacy;

e Financial support to culture specially folk crafts, folk music and performing arts.

Socially Responsible Financing (SRF) under CSR:

According to the Sustainable Finance Policy, socially responsible financing are as follows:

e Community Investment for addressing Climate Resilience and Disaster Management in a
concessional rate (finance to clean air, clean water, minimizing industrial and municipal
waste, recovery and protection of water bodies, marshy lands, expansion of green coastal
belt, water purification, sustainable sanitation, water blockage mitigation, soil and water

salinity mitigation, river erosion prevention); A

9|Page

--- Page 13 ---
Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

e Financing in Green/Clean transportation projects (cycles, green vehicles those run on
wind, solar energy, electric vehicles with battery management, bio-fuels etc.);

e Financing in Sand-witch Panel (Floating or Movable Houses in coastal areas or climate
vulnerable zone);

e Financing in Govt. approved Eco-tourism project.

Banks and FIs may finance in concessional rate of interest from their CSR fund in the above
mentioned fields. Concessional amount of interest will be treated as CSR where the interest rate
is lower than the weighted average cost of fund. Utilization of such CSR fund will be applicable
only upon Bank/FIs’ own source financing at concessional rate of interest.

10. Women empowerment:

Women in Bangladesh struggles, face barriers in nearly every aspect of their lives, including
access to health services, economic opportunities, professional participation and access to
finance. Bangladesh Bank’s intend to facilitate female participation, reduce gender inequality,
establishing their basic rights.

Banks and FIs may take the following CSR initiatives for country-wide women empowerment:

10.1 Support to female education through financial assistance/stipend;
10.2 Skill development programs for unskilled women;

10.3. Supply of equipment to the trained women for self-employment;
10.4 Financial support to women for a startup;

10.5 Food, shelter and on-hands training to helpless/vulnerable women;
10.6 Financial assistance/concessional credit to women without collateral;
10.7 Construction of women hostel buildings;

10.8 Construction of separate wash blocks for female students in school and college premises;
10.9 Providing separate transportation facilities for women employees;
10.10 Women’s participation in employment;

10.11 Assistance to Birangana (বীরাঙ্গনা);

10.12 Any others deem fit by BB.

11. Special instructions:

11.1 Banks and FIs must have due diligence checklist before disbursement of CSR fund;

11.2 All financial transactions related to CSR activities must be executed through proper
banking channel;

11.3 CSR activities need to cover all divisions of the country;

11.4 Banks and FIs should take utmost care to check and avert duplication/double counting in
CSR activities while distributing the CSR fund to individuals/projects;

11.5 Timely intervention in proper manner as per BB’s time to time instruction through CSR
for any national emergency/crisis. A

10|Page

--- Page 14 ---
12.

13.

Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

Prohibition in CSR Activities:

12.1 Activities related to under-aged/child labor/forced labor;

12.2 Threats to social value/public image in the community;

12.3 Sponsorship in sports and cultural activities at international level;

12.4 Branding/advertisement/business development;

12.5 Activities not supported by the country’s laws and regulations;

12.6 Threats to environmental degradation;

12.7 Aid/abet/finance to militancy and terrorism (AML/CTF);

12.8 Any others deem fit by BB.

Budgetary allocation process and Administrative setup:

13,1 All Banks and FIs should spend expected level from their net profit after tax for annual
CSR activities;

13.2 Foreign Banks/FIs may spend fund from their Global Head/Group Offices/foreign
grants from the donors. Such grant must be reflected on the books of accounts of Banks
and FIs. Banks/FIs must disclose such expenditure with supporting documents and
formatted report submitted to Bangladesh Bank. In budgetary allocation, such
expenditure will be treated as CSR activities from ‘other sources of fund;

13.3. Besides, Islami Shariah-based Banks/FIs may spend as CSR from their Compensation
Realized account, Zakat fund, Doubtful income, and any other income which are not
included in their operational income and not distributed to their shareholders. In such
expenditure Banks and FIs must follow the Islami Shariah-based rules and regulations to
spend the sectoral CSR activities. On such expenditure a certain amount will be treated
for CSR performance rating decided by BB;

13.4 According to CSR policies approved by the board, Annual CSR programs will be drawn
up and implemented by the Sustainable Finance Unit (SFU) of a bank/FI. SFU must
follow the TOR (terms of reference) provided by Bangladesh Bank and will be
responsible for all sorts of CSR activities;

13.5 SFU will propose budgetary allocations for CSR programs annually for approval of the
board of the bank/financial institution; the board will approve allocations by appropriations
from annual post-tax net profit; if the amount of CSR expenditure exceeds the budgetary
allocation, it must be approved in the form of the revised budget;

13.6 SFU will solely be responsible for the preparation of the budget. SFU may allocate a
portion from the budget to the foundation for carrying out CSR activities. In this case, an
MOU will be signed between SFU and the foundation and the CSR activities of the
foundation will be monitored by SFU as wells

11|Page

--- Page 15 ---
14.

Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

13.7

13.8

13.9

Banks and FIs may assign external implementing agencies/third parties/NGO/MFIs in
addition to banking channel/foundation to conduct CSR activities (if necessary) with a
view to proper CSR allocation and disbursement. Experience, specialty, technical
knowledge, and research or corporate reputation of these external agencies must be
ensured;

Banks and FIs may perform CSR activities in the interest of vulnerable groups through
their own foundation. Sustainable Finance Unit (SFU) of Banks and FIs will place
budgetary allocations for approval of the board/competent authority according to the fund
requirements of the foundation. The board/competent authority will approve specific
budgetary allocation to the foundation from Banks/Fls’ annual post tax net profits/other
sources of fund;

The proposals for board approval must scrupulously avoid any allocation in favor of any
entity, directly or indirectly connected with directors, senior management members of the
bank/financial institution or with the trustees of its CSR foundation.

Monitoring of CSR Activities:

14.1

14.2
14.3

14.4

14.5

14.6

14.7

14.8

The CSR activities of Banks, FIs and Foundations will be under the oversight of the
Sustainable Finance Department and all other supervision departments of Bangladesh
Bank;

The CSR activities of banks and FIs will be under the oversight of their internal audit;
Any suspected event project of any institution/individuals having CSR assistance is
charged with abuse of CSR assistance will be ineligible to access for any further
assistance and may be reported to law enforcement agencies for penal proceedings
according to relevant laws and regulations;

Every bank/financial institution shall be responsible for the monitoring of the proper
utilization of the CSR support assistance for intended purposes;

In the case of CSR allocation to institutions/organizations, it is advisable for the SFUs to
monitor the phased disbursements commensurate with progress in proper end-use;

SFU will collect required documents to ensure proper end-use of assistance to
institutions/individuals;

Boards of Banks/FIs and MANCOM/competent authority (in case of FBs) will review
reports of CSR allocation and end-use monitoring before approving new allocations for
subsequent years;

All records of CSR activities along with end-use monitoring documents should be kept
available for onsite inspection by BB/internal and external audits. A

12|Page

--- Page 16 ---
15.

16.

Policy Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility
for Banks and Financial Institutions

Reporting and Disclosure:
Banks and FIs will

> disclose their CSR activities in a specific chapter of their annual report. Disclosure in
print/electronic media is expected and will be appreciated;

> submit CSR reports to BB on half-yearly basis in the stipulated format;

> publish a CSR annual report on their websites.

Conclusion:

CSR activities are directly or indirectly linked to many of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). Bangladesh Bank is committed to supporting the vulnerable and underprivileged groups
by promoting the social responsibility framework approach. In this context, Banks and 119 must
adopt a strong commitment to ensure sustainable development through positive supports towards
social, economic and environmental responsibility to the society and the country as a whole.
Banks/FIs should put great emphasis on complying with these guidelines accordingly and
exhaustively that will reflect on the sustainability rating of Banks and Fs. k

13| Page