--- Page 1 ---
সাসটেইনেবল ফাইন্যান্স ডিপার্টমেন্ট
বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক
প্রধান কার্যালয়
ঢাকা
SATANSG: www.bb.org.bd

১৯ জুন ২০২২
এসএফডি সার্কুলার নং-০২ তারিখঃ -----------------

০৫ আষাঢ় ১৪২৯
ব্যবস্থাপনা পরিচালক/প্রধান নির্বাহী কর্মকর্তা

বাংলাদেশে STS সকল তফসিলি ব্যাংক |

করোনা ভাইরাসের কারণে সৃষ্ট সংকট মোকাবেলায়
প্রিশিপমেন্ট ক্রেডিট খাতে পুনঃঅর্থায়ন ST

শিরোনামোক্ত বিষয়ে ব্যাংকিং প্রবিধি ও নীতি বিভাগ কর্তৃক জারীকৃত বিআরপিডি সার্কুলার নং-০৮, তারিখ ১৮

মে ২০২২ এর প্রতি আপনাদের দৃষ্টি আকর্ষণ করা যাচ্ছে ।

২। উক্ত সার্কুলার অনুযায়ী গঠিত ৫০০০ (পাঁচ হাজার) কোটি টাকার পুনঃ্অর্থায়ন Sard আওতায় আগ্রহী

ব্যাংকসমূহকে Annexure-A অনুযায়ী বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংকের সাসটেইনেবল ফাইন্যান্স ডিপার্টমেন্ট এর সাথে

“অংশগ্রহণ

চুক্তি (Participation Agreement) সম্পাদন করতে হবে। তবে Bo: চুক্তিবদ্ধ ব্যাংকসমূহকে নতুন করে

“অংশগ্রহণ চুক্তি' (Participation Agreement) সম্পাদন করতে হবে না।

Zz

৩। অংশগ্রহণ চুক্তি সম্পাদনকারী ব্যাংক কর্তৃক ব্যাংকিং প্রবিধি ও নীতি বিভাগের ইস্যুকৃত সার্কুলার
নং-০৮/২০২২ এর ১৪কে) নং অনুচ্ছেদে বর্ণিত নির্দেশনা ও পদ্ধতি অনুসরণপূর্বক দলিলাদি/তথ্যাদিসহ নির্ধারিত ছকে
(Annexure-B) প্রি-শিপমেন্ট ক্রেডিট বিতরণের বিপরীতে পরিচালক (এসএফডি), সাসটেইনেবল ফাইন্য

ডিপার্টমেন্ট, বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক, প্রধান কার্যালয়, ঢাকা বরাবর পুনঃঅর্থায়নের জন্য আবেদন করতে হবে |

৪ । আবেদনপত্রের সাথে বিআরপিডি সার্কুলার নং-০৮/২০২২ অনুচ্ছেদ-১৪ খে)-এ বর্ণিত দলিলা
ডাও নিম্নোক্ত দলিলাদি দাখিল করতে হবে:


দি/তথ্যাদি

ক) ব্যাংকের শাখাভিত্তিক মোট প্রি-শিপমেন্ট ক্রেডিট সুবিধা দাবি সংক্রান্ত তথ্য (Annexure-C);

খ) গ্রাহকভিত্তিক প্যাকিং ক্রেডিট সংক্রান্ত তথ্য (Annexure-D);
গ) লেটার অব অথরাইজেশন (Annexure-E) এবং

ঘ) রপ্তানিমূল্য অপ্রত্যাবাসন (Overdue Export Bill) সংক্রান্ত ঘোষণাপত্র (Annexure-F) |

৫। অংশগ্রহণকারী ব্যাংকের ব্যবস্থাপনা পরিচালক/প্রধান নির্বাহী কর্মকর্তা অথবা তাঁর মনোনীত

কর্মকর্তার

স্বাক্ষরে ত্রেমাসিক ভিত্তিতে খণ বিতরণ ও আদায় সংক্রান্ত প্রতিবেদন Annexure-J অনুযায়ী সংশ্লিষ্ট ত্রেমাসিক অন্তে

সাসটেইনেবল ফাইন্যান্স ডিপার্টমেন্ট, বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক, প্রধান কার্যালয়, ঢাকা বরাবর দাখিল করতে হবে ।
চলমান

পরবর্তী মাসের ১৫(পনের) দিনের ( মার্চ, জুন, সেপ্টেম্বর এবং ডিসেম্বর ভিত্তিক) মধ্যে পরিচালক (এসএফডি),

পাতা ১/২

--- Page 2 ---
-৯ই-

৬। এ সার্কুলারের সংযুক্তিসমূহ (Annexure A, B, C, D, E, F, 0, H, I, J) সার্কুলারের অবিচ্ছেদ্য অংশ
মর্মে গণ্য AT | এতদ্যতীত বিআরপিডি সার্কুলার নং ০৮/২০২২ এর অন্যান্য সকল নির্দেশনা পরিপালনীয় হবে ।

ব্যাংক কোম্পানি আইন, ১৯৯১ এর ৪৫ ধারায় প্রদত্ত ক্ষমতাবলে এ নির্দেশনা জারি করা হলো যা অবিলম্ষে কার্যকর
হবে।


(খন্দকার মোরশেদ মিল্লাত)
পরিচালক(এসএফডি)
ফোন৪৯৫৩০৩২০

--- Page 3 ---
ANNEXURE-A


PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT


Between




BANGLADESH BANK(BB)(Central Bank of Bangladesh)






And







[Name of the Scheduled Bank in Bangladesh]

As participant in the








BB’s REFINANCE SCHEME for PRE-SHIPMENT CREDIT

--- Page 4 ---
PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT
PARTIES

This Participation Agreement (hereinafter also referred to as “Participation Agreement” or ‘Agreement’)
is signed on the ……… day of …………, 20……

Between

Bangladesh Bank (hereinafter also called as ‘BB’), established by the Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972
(President’s Order No.127 of 1972) having its Head Office at Motijheel C/A, Dhaka, Bangladesh
represented by the Sustainable Finance Department (hereinafter also called as ‘SFD’)
And

[Name of the Bank] (hereinafter also called as “Participating Financial Institution” or ‘PFI’), duly
established under the Companies Act 1994 and carrying on its business under the Bank Company Act
1991 (Amended up-to 2013) having license from Bangladesh Bank under BB License
No…………………… dated …………………….., as participant in the BB’s Refinance Scheme for
Pre-shipment credit.

PREAMBLE

Whereas, (A) BB introduced a refinancing scheme (revolving fund) of Tk.5000.00 (Five Thousand) Crore
to offer refinance facility against the Bank’s finance to boost up export and foreign exchange earnings
with a view to contributing to the economic development of Bangladesh.

(B) Ways of offering refinance facilities to the PFIs against their financing in Pre-shipment credit
identified/proclaimed by the Bangladesh Bank will be determined based on the terms and conditions set
forth in the BRPD Circular No. 08, dated May 18, 2022 and SFD Circular No. 02 , dated 19 June, 2022
and also as per the circulars/circular letters to be issued time to time by the BB.

(C) It is required for the PFI which is interested in availing refinance facilities under the BB’s Refinance
Scheme for Pre-shipment credit to enter into a participation agreement with the BB.

(D) PFIs those are interested to avail refinance facilities from the above-mentioned refinance scheme/fund
may avail of the refinance facility upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions set forth in BRPD Circular
No. 08, dated May 18, 2022 and SFD Circular No. 02, dated 19 June, 2022 and also as per the
circulars/circular letters to be issued time to time by the BB and also has to agree to comply with the
terms and conditions of this participation agreement.

--- Page 5 ---
Now, therefore, the parties hereby agree as follows:

Article-I

Section-1: Definitions and Related Terms.

Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined in this section, for the purposes of this agreement
and of any agreement supplemental thereto, have the respective meaning herein specified, as follows:

a) ‘BB’ means Bangladesh Bank, the central bank of the Peoples Republic of Bangladesh established by
the Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 (President's Order No.127 of 1972).

b) ‘SFD’ means Sustainable Finance Department of Bangladesh Bank.

c) ‘PFI’ means Participating Financial Institution (Scheduled Bank) that wishes to participate in the BB’s
Refinancing Scheme for Pre-shipment credit.

d) ‘Bank’ means any scheduled bank operating its business in Bangladesh having banking license from
the Bangladesh Bank.

e) ‘BRPD’ means Banking Regulation and Policy Department of Bangladesh Bank.

f) ‘Financing’ means the lending by PFI to the beneficiary/ultimate borrower under the refinancing
scheme.

g) ‘Refinancing’ means the funding of the BB that will be provided to the PFI against their financing
under the Refinance Scheme for Pre-shipment credit.

h) ‘Beneficiary’ means any borrower who is an exporter/export oriented industry/institution that may get
loan for Pre-shipment credit under the refinance scheme.

i) ‘Taka’ (hereinafter also called as ‘Tk’) means the currency of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.

j) ‘Fund’ means refinance scheme fund for pre-shipment credit.

Article-II

Eligibility for availing Refinance

a) Under this scheme Refinance facility will be considered only for Pre-shipment credit as per BRPD
Circular No. 08, dated May 18, 2022. No credit facility for B/B L/C and other Accessories and or any
other loan shall be considered under this refinance scheme.

--- Page 6 ---
b) No loan given to defaulter will be eligible for refinance under this scheme.

c) According to this agreement, the PFI will submit Demand Promissory Note (DP Note) in favour of the
Bangladesh Bank before BB’s release of disbursement of refinance to the PFI to ensure repayment of
refinance with interest.

d) In case of any violation/deviation/non-compliance of the rules/regulations/notifications/guidelines/
circular/circular letters by the PFI will cause immediate cancellation of the refinance approval and BB
will go for immediate deduction of the refinanced amount with interest (Bank rate) from the non-
compliant PFI’s current account maintained with Bangladesh Bank, Motijheel Office.


Article-III

Section-1: Rate of Interest under Refinance Scheme for Pre-shipment credit.

PFI may charge interest @3.50% pa at maximum on Pre-shipment credit to the borrower and
Bangladesh Bank will charge/realize interest @0.50% on refinance to PFI as per section 10 and 11 of
BRPD circular 08, dated May 18, 2022 respectively.


Article-IV

Section-1: Application Procedure under Refinance Scheme for Pre-shipment credit.

a) PFI will submit application duly signed by their MD/CEO to Director, SFD, BB, HO on weekly basis
within the next week after the date of shipment of the consignment against their Pre-shipment Credit with
evidence of shipment and other related documents.

b) PFI can get up-to 100% (if eligible) refinance against their disbursed loan amount under this scheme.
In this regard Bangladesh Bank's decision will be considered as final.

Article-V

Recovery and Monitoring.

Provisions contained in section 15 of BRPD Circular No. 08, dated May 18, 2022 to be duly observed
regarding recovery of credit disbursed by the PFI to the borrower and refinance released to PFI by BB
under the scheme.

--- Page 7 ---
Article-VI

Eligible sector under Refinance Scheme.

Locally produced export oriented industries/enterprises.

Article-VII

Proper Utilization of Pre-shipment Credit and other Specified Conditions

Section 1.1: Proper Utilization of Pre-shipment Credit

PFI will provide/furnish information/documents/statements to the BB regarding end-use/proper utilization
of the refinanced Pre-shipment Credit in the prescribed forms and manner asked by the BB. Bangladesh
Bank will preserve the right to conduct onsite inspection (if required) at any time to verify proper
utilization of the refinanced loan.

Section-1.2: Other specified conditions.

a) Selection of borrower, loan sanction, taking securities against loan, disbursement, documentation,
determination of debt-equity ratio, proper utilization and monitoring of loan to be ensured by PFI on the
basis of

existing circulars/circular letters issued by the Bangladesh Bank
(ii) PFI’s own rules/guidelines and
(iii) Banker-Customer relationship

b) Total responsibility and liability regarding loan risks and loan recovery of the loan to client will be
vested at the PFI’s end.

c) Repayment of refinance cannot be correlated with the recovery of loan by the PFI from the
beneficiaries/ultimate borrowers.

d) If the disbursed loan account becomes default at the beneficiary/ultimate borrower’s level, the
refinance facility will by default be considered as void. PFI must instantly inform the BB about default of
such loan. Bangladesh Bank will recover the outstanding refinanced loan amount along-with interest at a
time.

e) PFI will ensure duly compliance of required/applicable directions/provisions imposed/circulated by the
competent authority and Bangladesh Bank before loan disbursement.

f) Bangladesh Bank will take appropriate measures/necessary steps according to the prevailing laws and
regulations, if the PFI does not provide necessary information/statement regarding refinance of Pre-
shipment Credit within due time as determined by BB’s rules/regulations.

g) The tenor of this revolving refinance scheme is 5 (Five) years from 13 April 2020 and the refinance
facility under the said scheme will be continued till the availability of the fund.

h) Bangladesh Bank preserves the right to change/amend or make any addition/deletion or modification
regarding the terms and conditions of the refinance scheme/fund.

i) Circulars/Circular Letters to be issued from time to time by the Bangladesh Bank regarding such
amendments as mentioned in the sub-section ‘h’ above will be treated as an integral part of this
agreement.

--- Page 8 ---
j) All risks related to loan given to borrower will be borne by PFI and PFI will ensure the compliance of
export and production related directions/policy of the Government.

k) PFI will duly follow the BB’s rules of classification and provisioning regarding the concerned loan.

l) No refinance facility will be considered against pre-shipment credit allowed under export order/export
credit issued by shell company/bank.

m) PFI shall follow the policy of Single Borrower Exposure Limit in case of extended credit facility
favouring single customer/group.

n) Bangladesh Bank preserves the right to reject any application of refinance under this Scheme, due to
cause/causes considered fit to it and not to be explained.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the [Name of the PFI] has caused this agreement to be executed in its name
and its corporate seal to be hereunto affixed and attested by its duly authorized officers, and the
Bangladesh Bank as the administrator of the fund, has caused this agreement to be executed, all as of the
date first above written.



[Name of the PFI]
[PFI SEAL]




[Signature]






[Managing Director/CEO]

[SEAL]





BANGLADESH BANK









[BB SEAL]



[Signature]





[Director]



Sustainable Finance Department








[SEAL]
WITNESS:

[Signature]

[Name and designation of witness from BB]


[SEAL]


[Signature]
[Name and designation of witness from PFI]

[SEAL]

--- Page 9 ---
ANNEXURE- B


Date: Month DD, YYYY


Director
Sustainable Finance Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

Application for Loan/Investment under Pre-Shipment Credit Refinance Scheme

Dear Sir,

Please refer to BRPD Circular No. 08 dated 18 May 2022 and SFD Circular No.2 dated 19 June 2022 on
the captioned subject.

In accordance with the procedures set in the above mentioned circulars, we, (Name of the Bank) hereby
request refinance from Bangladesh Bank against the advance/investment made by our bank as per
Annexure C and Annexure D.

We are enclosing here-with documents in support of our pre-shipment loan/investment disbursement as
required from your end.

We would, therefore, request you to grant re-finance of total BDT ………… at the rate ……. for
maximum 180 days and credit our current account number ………. maintained with your Motijheel
Office. We hereby authorize you to debit our current account with yourself for the principal and interest
amount on the due date as per the said circulars and Participation Agreement (Annexure-A) if not repaid
by us within the due date.


Yours faithfully,



Signature:
Name:
Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer/Authorized Official
Phone Number:
email:

Enclosed documents
( As per BRPD Circular:08/2022, SFD Circular No:02/2022

--- Page 10 ---
ANNEXURE-C
(FOR HEAD OFFICE)

Name of the Bank :

Sl.
No.
Name of the Branch
& Address
Number of the
Borrower
Amount of
Refinance Claim
(In Taka)
Remarks

































































Total:




Signature with Seal

MD/CEO/MD or CEO (in-charge)/Credit Head/ID Head/Authorized Official
(Name & Designation with email address and Phone Number)

--- Page 11 ---
ANNEXURE-D
(For Branch)
Name of the Branch:
Name of the Borrower:
CIB code of the Borrower:
CIB Status as of Application Date:
Table:1
Sl, No.

Export Order/
Export L/C/
Export Contract
Number & Date
Date of Expiry of
Export Order/Export
L/C /Contract

Export Order/
Export L/C/
Export Contract
Value
PC Disbursement
date
(Figure in BDT)
Amount of PC
(Figure in BDT)
Amount of Refinance
Claimed against PC
(Figure in BDT)














Total:



Table:2
PC Limit
(BDT in crore)
Amount of Refinance Claimed
(as per Column 7 of Table:1)
(BDT in crore)
Amount of Refinance
received under this
Scheme (BDT in crore)
Cumulative Amount of
Refinance
(BDT in crore)`
Achievement: Percentage
with PC Limit
4=(2+3)
5=(4/1)*100%






Signature and Seal of authorized Official(s)
With date

--- Page 12 ---
Annexure-E
Letter of Authorization

I/We hereby authorize to
Name


Designation


Department
on behalf of me to execute application(s) with related documents
regarding “Refinance of Pre-shipment Credit Scheme” under BRPD
circular 08, dated: 18 May 2022.



Seal and Signature
of the authorized
Officer





Seal and Signature
MD/CEO
Annexure-F
(e¨vs‡Ki c¨v‡W)

--- Page 13 ---
রপ্তানিমূল্য অপ্রত্যাবাসন (Overdue Export Bill) সংক্রান্ত

এই মর্মে প্রত্যয়ন করা যাচ্ছে যে, পপ্রি-শিপমেন্ট ক্রেডিট খাতে পুনঃঅর্থায়ন স্বীম” তহবিলের আওতায়

পুনঃঅর্থায়ন সুবিধা গ্রহণের মাধ্যমে রপ্তানি/শিপমেন্ট করার পর সংশ্লিষ্ট ক্ষেত্রে মেসার্স---------- এর অনুকূলে পরপর

তিনটি রপ্তানিমূল্য অপ্রত্যাবাসিত (Overdue Export Bill) নাই |

ব্যাংকের প্রধান নিবহী/ মনোনীত কর্মকর্তা

--- Page 14 ---
ANNEXURE-G

Ref:

Date: , 2022
Director
Sustainable Finance Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Motijheel
Dhaka


Letter of Debit Authority
Dear Sir,
In reference to our letter, Ref no.: ….... ; dated: , 2020, we hereby unconditionally and irrevocably
authorize Bangladesh Bank, to Debit our account with Bangladesh Bank, for realization of
applicable interest, principal and Charges/Fees to be incurred by Bangladesh Bank for the
sanctioned BDT …......../- (BDT…..only) credit facility under “Refinance Scheme against Pre-
shipment Credit ” of Bangladesh Bank.
This Letter of Authority shall remain valid and in full effect until full and final settlement of the
refinance facility under “Refinance Scheme against Pre-shipment Credit ” sanctioned to …. BANK
LIMITED. This Letter of Authority cannot be cancelled, revoked, relieved, discharged, amended or
in any way be prejudiced without prior written consent of Bangladesh Bank and/or by any other
mandate or authority issued or given by us in relation to our account, until and unless the refinance
Facility is fully adjusted and repaid.
FOR AND ON BEHALF OF …..... BANK LIMITED

Name:
Managing Director & CEO/Authorized Official

--- Page 15 ---
ANNEXURE-H

(Stamp)

Letter of Continuity

Director
Sustainable Finance Department
Bangladesh Bank, Head Office
Dhaka

Dear Sir,
I/We
enclose
herewith
Demand
Promissory
Note
for
…………………………………………………………… Signed by me/us on behalf of the Bank which is given to you as
security for the repayment of any Loan (Refinance against Pre-shipment Credit) presently outstanding to
my/our name or in the name of either of us/bank or in the of the exporter’s institution and also for the
repayment
of
any
Loan
(Refinance
against
Pre-shipment
Credit)

to
the
extent
of
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………which I/We
or either of us may avail of hereafter and the said Promissory Note is to be a security to you for the
repayment of the ultimate balance amount remaining unpaid on the Loan (Refinance against Pre-
shipment Credit) account and I/We am/are to remain liable on the said Promissory Note
notwithstanding the fact that by payments made into the said Loan (Refinance against Pre-shipment
Credit) amount from time to time the said Loan (Refinance against Pre-shipment Credit) account may
from time to time be reduced or extinguished.
Although the said Loan (Refinance against Pre-shipment Credit) account is in the name
of………………………………………………………………………………………………………… and will be operated upon only by
the said ……………………………………………..………… all of us shall be liable jointly and severally as aforesaid.


Yours faithfully,

Managing Director & Chief Executive
Officer/Authorized Official
Dated: ………………………..

--- Page 16 ---
ANNEXURE-I


PROMISSORY NOTE


Tk. …………………………….

Date ……………………

We
jointly
and
severally
promise
to
pay
on
demand
to
or
order,
the
sum
of
Tk...............................................................................................................(Taka
Only for value received with interest thereon from this date, at the rate of ………………………… percent per
annum or as may be fixed by the Bangladesh Bank from time to time.
Dated: …………………..
Yours faithfully,
Managing Director/ Chief Executive Officer/
Authorized Official







Witness:

--- Page 17 ---
ANNEXURE- J
Quarterly Statement of Refinance against Pre-shipment Credit
as of March/June/September/December, ……….
SL.No.
Branch
Name

Branch Code
Export
Order/Export
LC/Export
Contract
Value (in ‘000
BDT)
Amount of
Pre-shipment
Credit by
bank (PFI)
(in ‘000 BDT)
Re-finance
Claimed for
Number of
Borrowers
Amount
Claimed for
Re-finance
(in ‘000
BDT)
Amount
Approved for
Re-finance
by BB (in
‘000 BDT)

Outstanding Balance (as per CL)
Of Pre-shipment Credit under
BB Re-finance
(in ‘000 BDT)
UC (Standard)
UC (SMA)
Classified
10











Non-repatriated Export Value
(in ‘000 BDT)
Remarks
11
12




Signature with Seal
Credit Head/ID Head
(Name & Designation with email address and Phone Number)


N.B. This quarterly report must be forwarded to Director, SFD, BB, HO (duly signed by MD/CEO/In-charge of MD/CEO/Authorized Official on Letter of Head Pad of the
Respective Bank)