--- Page 1 ---
Sustainable Finance Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
26 June 2022

SFD Circular No-03 Date: -----------------

Managing Directors/Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Please refer to SFD Circular No. 02 dated 08 February 2017.

“Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Banks and Financial
Institutions in Bangladesh” was issued to facilitate Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) along-with other developmental plans of the
Government. ESRM guideline has been revisited with a view to fortifying the risk management

structure to address sustainability agenda of the financial sector.

2. Guidelines on ESRM has been made comprehensive with provision for Environmental and
Social Due Diligence (ESDD) for financing Infrastructure Projects (Section-3.6). A third party
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will have to be conducted for financing in all
Infrastructure Projects, apart from Exclusion List and Generic or sector specific ESDD checklist.
ESIA will generally be arranged by the client at his/her/its own cost and submitted along with loan
application. Banks/Fls will ensure that the third party will be qualified on the basis of criteria set by
Bangladesh Bank in this purpose. Accordingly, a guidance note on ESIA has been incorporated for
benchmarking the criteria for the third party to conduct the assessment and standardize the structure

of ESIA Report (Annex-10).

Page 1 of 2

--- Page 2 ---
3. This revised ESRM guideline includes Excel-based Environmental and Social Due Diligence
(ESDD) checklist (Annex-2) for facilitating due diligence process. Apart from ESDD, Sector

Specific Guidance Notes for 10 vulnerable sectors has been incorporated (Annex-11).

4. “Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh” along with the revised
Excel-based Risk Rating Model, the Guidance Note on ESIA and the Sector Specific Guidance
Notes is being issued vide this circular under the authority given through Section 45 of Bank

Company Act, 1991 and Section 18 (Cha) of Financial Institutions Act, 1993.

This circular will come into force with immediate effect.

Yours sincerely,

(Khondkar Morshed Millat)
Director (SFD)
Phone: 9530320
Email: morshed.millat@bb.org.bd

Page 2 of 2

--- Page 3 ---
Bangladesh Bank






Guidelines on
Environmental &Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh












Sustainable Finance Department


June 2022

--- Page 4 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Preamble

Sustainability is concerned with protecting the planet, strengthening climate change resilience and
promoting social development, without endangering life on Earth or leaving anyone behind. This
concept seeks to cover our present needs without compromising resources for future generations.
With a view to integrating sustainability into overall credit management of banks and FIs,
Bangladesh Bank (BB) issued Guidelines on Environmental Risk Management (ERM) in 2011
which has been the pioneering initiative from any central bank or financial sector regulator. That
was mainly limited to threshold for assessing environmental and a few social risks only. The
approach remained qualitative towards rating the environmental risks.

Consequentially, BB issued Guidelines on ESRM in February 2017 to address the recommendations
of the ERM Guidelines and the outcomes of ESRM baseline survey for the financial sector through
a long process of in-house study and research within BB, IFC‘s (International Finance Corporation)
technical support, three tier consultation (Mail/E-mail based consultation, web-based consultation
and live consultation) with banks and FIs, consultation with development partners working on E&S
issues in financial sector. In particular, as the name suggests, the ESRM Guidelines expand the
scope of social risk assessment and introduce a number of social parameters in addition to
environmental parameters for risk assessment. The Guideline also exemplifies the sources of both
environmental risks and social risks for banks and FIs and highlights the benefits of having an
Environmental & Social Management System (ESMS) in place. Moreover, exhaustive approach has
been introduced in this version to make the assessment of risks more objective and more effective.

Based upon the implementation experience, this update to ESRM Guidelines supplemented with
Guidance Notes on ESRM for 10 sectors (Textile and Apparel, Cement Manufacturing, Tanning and
Leather Finishing, Ceramic Tile And Sanitary Ware Manufacturing, Pharmaceutical, Power,
Fertilizer Manufacturing, Pulp & Paper, Steel Re-Rolling, Ship Breaking), Guidance Note on
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and updated Excel-based Risk Rating
Template. Moreover, Guidelines on ESRM is also linked to ‗Risk Management Guidelines-2018‘
issued from Department of Off-site Supervision, BB and ‗Integrated Risk Management Guidelines
for Financial Institutions-2016‘ issued from Department of Financial Institutions and Markets, BB
under comprehensive risk management.

--- Page 5 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Message from Governor

Bangladesh is one of the emerging economies of the World and has witnessed rapid industrial
growth over the last two decades that has contributed significantly to the rise in the country‘s Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). At the same time, it also needs to be noted that Bangladesh is vulnerable
to risks related to environmental pollution and climate change impacts (in the form of natural
disasters like floods, cyclones) that are enhanced by human-made activities. Some of the common
Environmental & Social concerns include converting paddy fields into industrial land, filling of
water bodies for other purposes, encroaching into forest lands, pollution that need to be
discouraged for the sake of environmental and social sustainability of the country.

All these issues have significant adverse impacts on human health (from the perspective of both
public health and health & safety of workers exposed to harmful chemicals) and flora and fauna.
Severe health outbreaks, groundwater depletion, rapid degradation of natural habitat arising out of
these irresponsible business practices pose significant threat to the continuity of these business
activities, which in turn will adversely impact the loan portfolio of the banks and FIs if they invest
in these activities without taking mitigation of these environmental issues into account.

Banks and FIs have a significant role to play while taking a decision if loans should be disbursed to
businesses involving such activities. Moreover, banks and FIs need to manage the credit portfolio
through active consideration of environmental and social vulnerabilities. Following the
implementation experience of Guidelines on ERM since its issuance, remarkable awareness and
enthusiasm have been observed in financial sector both in context of risk management and
sustainability. In the meanwhile, Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) have been declared by
United Nations and have already been fully adopted by Government of Bangladesh. As prime
cornerstones of SDGs are environmental conservation and social protection, credit operations of
banks and FIs must be conducted through proper addressing of environmental and social issues.
Perspective Plans, National Sustainable Development Strategy, Five Year Plans and Delta Plan
2100 of Government of Bangladesh have been built upon the vision of green and sustainable
economy by ensuring social stability. To facilitate these plans and strategies of the Government, to
fortify the risk management structure of banks and FIs and to ingrain sustainability into the heart of
financial sector, it‘s time move further. In this backdrop, Bangladesh Bank officially released
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Banks and Financial
Institutions in Bangladesh in 2017. Following the implementation experience of the guidelines, BB
is now issuing its updated version to establish sectoral best practice. I hope, this will be effectively
implemented by banks and FIs under the guidance and leadership of the central bank towards
achieving sustainable development of the country.



Fazle Kabir

--- Page 6 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Foreword by Deputy Governor

In 2013, a baseline study was conducted by Bangladesh Bank jointly with IFC to assess the
implementation experience of Guidelines on ERM for the banks and FIs which was issued in 2011.
The outcomes of the study indicated to expand the scope of the guidelines by incorporating social
issues. In 2017 Bangladesh Bank issued a comprehensive framework on ESRM for banks and FIs in
light of the following context:

Typical examples of environmental issues in the country’s industrial landscape include generation
of highly polluted waste water due to lack of metering, reuse and recycling of water; sulphur-di-
oxide emissions from burning low grade coal in outdated brick kilns; contamination of terrestrial
and marine environment from leaching of toxic chemicals from scrapped ships due to improper
cleaning of ships before beaching and lack of implementation of waste management practices by the
ship breaking units; contaminated effluents and harmful fumes emitting from the steel re-rolling
units. Coal fired power plants near ecologically sensitive areas can also be damaging to local
biodiversity.

In terms of social issues related to labour practices and working conditions of the country’s
industry sector, the collapse of the eight storied “Rana Plaza” garment factory in 2013, Boiler
burst in Tampaco Foils in 2016 and the fire incident at Tazreen Fashion in 2012 killing thousands
of garment workers are consequences of gross negligence by the factory owners towards structural
and fire safety, overlooking the poor working conditions in which the workers continued to work,
producing the garments that earned the country’s majority of the export revenue. The magnitude of
these incidents has drawn attention of all the global retailing brands who are the major buyers of
Bangladesh’s products. Other common concerns related to social issues include child labour,
discrimination and harassment, minimum wage etc. Consequently, the banks and FIs will have to
take cognizance of the status of compliance, mitigation measures of a business activity in terms of
national regulations and relevant international standards in this space before taking a decision on
lending.

Given the market context, the applicability of the guidelines has been updated and sector specific
guidelines for 10 environmentally and socially sensitive sectors have been incorporated. This
guideline has come through a long process of drafting by the experts, rigorous multi-step
consultation with banks and FIs as well as development partners. Bangladesh Bank will be fully
supportive as always in implementation of the guidelines along with capacity building initiatives.
Moreover, based upon the implementation experience, scope for modification is always open. Let‘s
foster the journey towards sustainability.



Abu Farah Md. Nasser

--- Page 7 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Table of Contents

OVERVIEW OF THE GUIDELINES
TYPICAL E&S RISKS FOR BANKS AND FIS IN BANGLADESH
APPLICABILITY OF THE GUIDELINES
APPLICABLE STANDARDS
11
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ESMS)
11
IMPLEMENTING ESMS
20
PROVISION OF INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES
20
ANNEX-1: EXCLUSION LIST
22
ANNEX-2: ESDD CHECKLIST
22
10.
ANNEX-3: ESCALATION MATRIX
23
11.
ANNEX-4: E&S RISKS IN DETAIL
24
12.
ANNEX-5: COVENANTS
34
13.
ANNEX-6: CORRECTIVE ACTION PLAN
35
14.
ANNEX-7: MONITORING CHECKLIST
37
15.
ANNEX-8: DEVELOPING AN ESMS
39
16.
ANNEX-9: LIST OF RELEVANT NATIONAL REGULATIONS, INTERNATIONAL TREATIES AND BEST
PRACTICES
43
17.
ANNEX-10: GUIDANCE NOTE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (ESIA)
UNDER ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
46
18. ANNEX-11: SECTOR SPECIFIC GUIDANCE NOTE ON ESRM
50

--- Page 8 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

List of Abbreviations
BDT
Bangladeshi Taka
BOD
Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CAMELS
Capital Adequacy Assets Management Capability Earnings Liquidity
Sensitivity
CITES
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
COD
Chemical Oxygen Demand
CRMC
Credit Risk Management Committee
DoE
Department of Environment
E&S
Environmental & Social
EC
Executive Committee
ECR
Environment Conservation Rules
ERM
Environmental Risk Management
ESAP
Environmental and Social Action Plan
ESDD
Environmental & Social Due Diligence
ESG
Environmental & Social Governnance
ESIA
Environmental & Social Impact Assessment
ESMS
Environmental & Social Management System
ESRM
Environment and Social Risk Management
ESRR
Environmental and Social Risk Rating
ETP
Effluent Treatment Plant
FI
Financial Institution
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GHGs
Greenhouse Gases
GIIP
Good International Industry Practice
HoC
Head of Credit
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IMF
International Monetary Fund
IP
Indigenous People
MD
Managing Director
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
ODS
Ozone Depleting Substances
PAH
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
PCB
Polychlorinated Biphenyl
PM
Particulate Matter
RMC
Risk Management Committee
RMG
Ready Made Garment
RO
Relationship Officials
SBN
Sustainable Banking Network
SFU
Sustainable Finance Unit
SME
Small & Medium Enterprises
TSS
Total Suspended Solids
UN
United Nations
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
VOC
Volatile Organic Compound

--- Page 9 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh


1. Overview of the Guidelines

The core objective of the Guidelines is to make banks and FIs realize to integrate Environment &
Social (E&S) risks and incorporate appropriate risk mitigation measures in overall credit
management to be able for expanding the credit/investment portfolio rather than avoid investing in
high E&S risks. Consequently, the ESRM Guidelines is supplemented with ten (10) sectors specific
guidance notes for investment and a comprehensive ESDD checklist and extends to the following
features to be more streamlined, interactive and user friendly in nature:
 The ESRM Guideline provides a robust, auto generated, quantitative risk rating system to
reduce the subjectivity of a qualitative risk assessment method that was present in the ERM
Guidelines.
 The ESRM guideline has a bigger focus on social and climatic risks which are becoming
relevant and crucial for Bangladesh.
 The ESRM Guideline, in addition to investment threshold, define applicability based upon
sector specific E&S impacts and the categories are expanded to include agriculture, cottage,
micro, retail and trading enterprises, small enterprises, medium enterprises, large enterprises
and infrastructure projects.
 The organisational roles and responsibility defined in the ESRM Guidelines are built upon
the principles of integration of E&S risks into the bank or FI‘s overall credit policy. It
clearly delineates the responsibility of different functions of a bank or FI in terms of E&S
risk assessment and the decision-making process based upon E&S risk rating.
 This guideline is supplemented with guidance notes for ten (10) environmentally sensitive
sectors for investment. These guidance notes will be the guiding principle for E&S risk
management for those sectors and can be used as the template for developing guidance notes
for other environmentally sensitive sectors.
Accordingly this guideline includes an E&S Due Diligence (ESDD) checklist (Annex-2)
which is divided into three sections; (i) General risks, (ii) Environmental health and safety
risks, (iii) Social risks. The checklist is integrated with the generic and the 10
environmentally sensitive sectors for investment. Thus it is broad in scope but at the same
time the process is much more streamlined for ease of use by the practitioners in the
financial sector.
 In this guideline, the term ‗loan‘ will synonymously be used as ‗investment‘ for Shariah
based banks and FIs.

2. Typical E&S Risks for Banks and FIs in Bangladesh

Potential E&S risks may not seem significant or relevant at the time of approval of a financial
transaction, but may become so during execution, for instance as a result of higher regulatory
standards and increased levels of enforcement. Please refer to E&S risks in detail (Annex-4) for
explanation on some of the common E&S risks.

--- Page 10 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

3. Applicability of the Guidelines

The loan categories for which the ESRM Guideline is applicable are agriculture finance; cottage,
micro small, medium enterprises (CMSME) finance; financing in retail and trading enterprises;
consumer financing; financing in all large manufacturing and service enterprises (other than
CMSME, retail and trading enterprises) and infrastructure finance. All loan proposals
(New/Renewal/Rescheduling/Restructuring) for the above applicable sectors have to be first
screened against the exclusion list (Annex-1). Only on-balance sheet exposures need to be assessed
under this guideline. Whenever any off-balance sheet exposure would be transformed into an on-
balance sheet one, ESDD has to be conducted on that. For demand/continuous loan, conducting of
ESDD has to be made during new approval/renewal/rescheduling/restructuring, not during
disbursements.

3.1. Agriculture: In the agriculture sector, if an agriculture loan application (New/Renewal/
Rescheduling/Restructuring) involves activities related to farming (e.g. crop production, animal
farming, poultry and dairy firms, fisheries and hatchery, shrimp culture, nursery, apiculture,
horticulture) and there is any environmentally or socially adverse agricultural practices involved
such as use of pesticides, agro- chemicals leading to top soil depletion, ground water contamination;
use of nitrogenous fertilizers instead of organic fertilizers leading to nitrous oxide emissions and the
loan/investment proposal amounting to more than BDT 2.5 million (25.00 Lakh), in addition to
exclusion list, it is to be complied with ESDD checklist (Annex-2). The loan application amounting
less than BDT 2.5 million (25.00 Lakh) for above mentioned farming activities as well as
agriculture financing related to farming with full organic and environment friendly practices of any
amount will not require complying ESDD checklist. Agribusiness involving sorting, packaging,
distribution and sales will also not require completing ESDD checklist.

3.2. Cottage, Micro, Retail and Trading Enterprises: For financing in cottage, micro, retail and
trading enterprises, only the exclusion list has to be complied. Loan proposal for E&S sensitive
retail & trading enterprises of any amount which include chemical or chemical ingredients, highly
fire absorbent products, electronic appliances, combustible oil, paper and dry materials, plastic items
has to be complied with the ESDD checklist.

3.3. Small Enterprises: Financing in Small Enterprises (manufacturing and services) and the
loan/investment proposal (New/Renewal/Rescheduling/Restructuring) of any amount which include
washing, dyeing and finishing units of RMG sector (water, chemical pollution), small steel re-
rolling mills (operational health and safety, thermal, air pollution), brick kilns (air pollution, child
labour, burning of fossil fuel), units for tanning, dressing and dyeing of leather and fur (water,
chemical, air pollution), pesticides, agrochemical and nitrogen manufacturing units (land
contamination, water, air pollution), chemicals and chemical products manufacturing units (safety,
pollution), rubber and plastic products manufacturing units (pollution), batteries and accumulators
manufacturing units (chemical pollution), any other industry or business segment falls under the red
category of ECR 1997 (Environmental Conservation Rule 1997) will have to be complied with the
ESDD checklist in addition to Exclusion List. Apart from environmental issues mentioned above,
for financing in small enterprises amounting to more than BDT 3.00 million (30.00 Lakh) has to be
complied with the ESDD checklist. If the financing proposal is not more than BDT 3.00 million
(30.00 Lakh), only the exclusion list has to be complied.

--- Page 11 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh


3.4.
Medium
Enterprises:
All
loan/investment
proposals
(New/Renewal/Rescheduling/
Restructuring) from medium enterprises (manufacturing and services) amounting to more than BDT
5.00 million (50.00 Lakh) enterprises have to be complied with the ESDD checklist in addition to
Exclusion List compliance. If the financing proposal is not more than BDT 5.00 million (50.00
Lakh), only the exclusion list has to be complied.

3.5. Large Enterprises (Manufacturing and Services): Financing in all large manufacturing and
service enterprises (other than CMSME, retail and trading enterprises) have to be complied with the
ESDD checklist in addition to Exclusion List compliance.

3.6. Infrastructure Projects: All loan applications (New/Renewal/Rescheduling/ Restructuring) for
Infrastructure Projects have to be complied with third party Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) [Guidance Note on ESIA in Annex-10] in addition to the compliance of ESDD
checklist and Exclusion List. Infrastructure projects include those basic facilities and services which
contribute to different economic activities and thereby help in the large scale socio-economic
development of the country. Infrastructure projects will cover the following categories:
 Power (Electricity, Oil or Gas) Generation, supply, pipelines etc
 Transport; Road, bridge, tunnels, airports, ports, railways, terminal & depots, inland
waterways
 Economic Zones, EPZ, PEPZ
 Communication/Telecommunication
 Fixed lines, transition lines & towers, satellites etc
 Land development, Real State, Commercial Building
 Tourism Industries

Loan applications for infrastructure projects of E&S sensitive industry sectors mentioned in Annex-
11 may require ESIA compliance as part of other regulatory requirements. Bank/FIs will ensure that
the ESIA has been complied before the loan transaction.

Table 1: Applicability of the guideline by the transaction type
No.
Transaction Type
Exclusion
List
ESDD
checklist
Third party
ESIA
Financing in all agriculture activities related to farming with
full organic and environment friendly practices.


Financing in all agriculture activities related to farming if
there is any environmentally or socially adverse agricultural
practices involved such as use of pesticides, agro-chemicals
leading to top soil depletion, ground water contamination;
use of nitrogenous fertilizers instead of organic fertilizers
leading to nitrous oxide emissions and the loan/investment
proposal amounting to not more than BDT 2.5 million (25.00
Lakh)


Financing in All agriculture activities related to farming if
there is any environmentally or socially adverse agricultural
practices involved such as use of pesticides, agro-chemicals
leading to top soil depletion, ground water contamination;

--- Page 12 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

10
use of nitrogenous fertilizers instead of organic fertilizers
leading to nitrous oxide emissions and the loan/investment
proposal amounting to more than BDT 2.5 million (25.00
Lakh)
Financing in all types of Cottage Enterprises, all types of
Micro, Retail & Trading Enterprises and Consumer
Financing


Financing in E&S sensitive retail & trading enterprises of
any amount which include chemical or chemical
ingredients, highly fire absorbent products, electronic
appliances, combustible oil, paper and dry materials,
plastic items

Financing in Small Enterprises (manufacturing and
services) and the loan/investment proposal amounting to not
more than BDT 3.00 million (30.00 Lakh)


Financing in Small Enterprises (manufacturing and
services) and the loan/investment proposal amounting to
more than BDT 3.00 million (30.00 Lakh)

Financing in all Medium Enterprises (manufacturing and
services) amounting to not more than BDT 5.00 million
(50.00 Lakh)


Financing in all Medium Enterprises (manufacturing and
services) amounting to more than BDT 5.00 million (50.00
Lakh)

10
Financing in Small/Medium Enterprises (manufacturing and
services) and the loan/investment proposal of any amount of
following categories:
a) Washing, dyeing and finishing units of RMG sector
(water, chemical pollution)
b) Small steel re-rolling mills (operational health and safety,
thermal, air pollution)
c) Brick kilns (air pollution, child labour, burning of fossil
fuel)
d) Units for tanning, dressing and dyeing of leather and fur
(water, chemical, air pollution)
e) Pesticides, agrochemical and nitrogen manufacturing units
(land contamination, water, air pollution)
f) Chemicals and chemical products manufacturing units
(safety, pollution)
g) Rubber and plastic products manufacturing units
(pollution)
h) Batteries and accumulators manufacturing units (chemical
pollution)
I) Any other industry or business segment falls under the red
category of ECR 1997 (Environmental Conservation Rule

--- Page 13 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

11
1997)
11
Financing in all large manufacturing and service
enterprises (other than CMSME, retail and trading
enterprises)

12
Financing in Infrastructure Projects

4. Applicable Standards

All national regulations pertaining to E&S governance will be applicable while carrying out E&S
due diligence of a particular transaction. This means all relevant E&S permits, consents, licenses,
and monitoring of E&S parameters as per the national regulations are to be complied by the
borrowers and these will be considered as mandatory compliance requirements for evaluation of a
loan application. A list of applicable national regulations and international treaties where
Bangladesh is a signatory as well as best practice is provided as Annex-9 for reference.

If clients have management systems in place as per international frameworks such as ISO 14001 for
environmental management, OHSAS 18001 for occupational health and safety, SA8000 for socially
acceptable practices in the workplace then it will be considered as good practices. Adherence to IFC
Performance Standards will be considered in case of large project financing as a good practice and
optional requirement. In order to identify, manage and mitigate E&S risks in lending, all banks/FIs
need to develop a robust Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS).

5. Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)

An E&S Management System (ESMS) is a set of policies, procedures, tools and internal capacity to
identify, monitor and manage a Bank/FI's exposure to the E&S risks of its clients. An ESMS states a
Bank/FI‘s commitment to E&S management, explains its procedures for identifying, assessing and
managing E&S risk of financial transactions, defines the decision-making process, describes the
roles, responsibilities and capacity needs of staff in doing so and states the documentation and
recordkeeping requirements. It also provides guidance on how to screen transactions, categorize
transactions based on their E&S risk, conduct E&S due diligence and monitor the client‘s E&S
performance. The ESMS includes the E&S policy and designated roles and responsibilities of
different tires of the banks and FIs. It is implemented through a set of procedures for:
 Screening transactions,
 Categorizing transactions based on their environmental and social risk,
 Conducting ESDD,
 Decision-making process,
 Monitoring the client‘s E&S performance, and
 Managing a client‘s non-compliance with the E&S standards of banks/FIs.

--- Page 14 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

12



















The procedures outlined in the ESMS need to be applied to each transaction as part of overall risk
management framework of a bank/FI. For each transaction, this also requires a bank/FI to formally
document its E&S review as part of its record-keeping process, consider E&S findings during the
decision-making process, and incorporate E&S requirements such as a corrective action plan as
clauses in legal agreements with clients/investee.

Key components of an ESMS are described below.

A. E&S Policy
An E&S policy states a Bank/FI's vision and mission with respect to the environment, society and
contributions to sustainable development. It is a short, written statement that articulates the
Bank/FI‘s commitment to integrating E&S considerations into its business activities as well as
contributions to sustainable development. It serves as the Bank/FI‘s foundation within which the
objectives and procedures of the ESMS are anchored. The E&S policy has to be approved by the
Board of Directors. It will include the following issues:
 Incorporating E&S risk considerations into all financing activities;
 Setting strategic E&S objectives;
 Establishing E&S requirements for clients such as complying with national E&S regulations
and international standards;
 Communicating E&S expectations to all employees, clients and other external stakeholders;
 Committing to improving the overall E&S performance of its portfolio through enhanced
risk management;
 Committing to continually building capacity of its employees to identify and manage E&S
risks.

--- Page 15 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

13
B. Organization structure
For an ESMS to function properly, it is essential that roles and responsibilities for carrying out the
necessary procedures and making decisions are clearly defined. The following staff of a Bank/FI
will be involved with implementing different aspects of the ESMS:

 Relationship Officials/Credit Officials (primarily deals with clients): Relationship
Officials (ROs) /Credit Officials (COs) are responsible for identifying E&S risks in a client‘s
operation by talking to the client/ relevant officials, site visits, collecting documents, permits
relevant for the proposed transaction. ROs are responsible for filling out the ESDD checklist in
consultation with the client at approval stage, collect additional information and respond to
credit queries if necessary also follow up with client if there are any pre disbursement actions
to be completed. ROs/COs also will negotiate with the client in finalising action plans and
timelines where necessary, check E&S covenant in sanction advice, follow up the clients‘
compliance of ESAP, E&S grievances and report to CRM/IRM officials.

 Official in CRM/IRM Division: Official in Credit/Investment Risk Management
(CRM/IRM) Division in Head Office/Branch (depending on centralized or decentralized credit
management system) is the first point of contact for any transaction once the ESDD has been
conducted by the ROs/COs. Based upon the risk rating, the official escalates the transaction to
Head of CRM/IRM. There must be a separate unit within CRM/IRM division for ESRM with
at least 01 (one) dedicated official.

 Head of Business: Head of Business is responsible to ensure that the ROs/COs under his/her
jurisdiction properly comply with the requirements of these guidelines during the initial
processing of loan/investment proposals and after disbursement of loan/investment.

 Head of CRM/IRM: Head of CRM/IRM is responsible for ensuring that in each transaction
no critical E&S issues were overlooked, there is adequate documentary evidence to support
client‘s E&S performance and to ensure enough measures have been taken to manage
identified risk.

 Senior Management and Board of Directors: The Senior Management is responsible for
the Bank/FI‘s overall commitment to E&S objectives. For Banks/FIs in Bangladesh, the
Managing Director (MD) and the Additional/Deputy Managing Director (AMD/DMD)
represents the senior management. Senior Management and the Board of Directors (BoD)
establish the Bank/FI‘s E&S requirements for clients. In cases of unresolved E&S issues or
non-compliance associated with a transaction that cannot be resolved by the Head of
CRM/IRM, Senior Management or the BoD determine the appropriate course of action to
follow to reduce the Bank/FI‘s potential exposure to E&S risk, which may include taking legal
action against the client. Board/EC (Executive Committee) is responsible for deciding if high
risk projects are acceptable to the Bank/FI‘s overall exposure to risk before proceeding with a
transaction. The Board in certain cases may decide to terminate a transaction based upon the
level of risk of the project. Risk Management Committee (RMC) of Board will review,
monitor and supervise the overall ESRM activities of bank/FIs.

 Loan/Credit Administration Department/Division (LAD/CAD): The LAD/CAD ensures
that the Bank/FI‘s E&S requirements are incorporated in legal agreements for each

--- Page 16 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

14
transaction. The LAD/CAD may advise if a client‘s non-compliance with E&S clauses
constitutes a breach of contract and is considered an Event of Default under the terms of the
legal agreement that requires follow up by Senior Management.

 Sustainable Finance Unit (SFU): SFU (Please refer to SFU Circular No. 02/2016 issued by
BB on December 01, 2016) of every Bank/FI in Bangladesh is responsible for coordination
with different departments, branches of the Bank/FI for ensuring the compliance of ESRM and
proper implementation of ESMS. This unit is responsible for updating the Board/RMC
through Sustainable Finance Committee on the current status of the Bank/FI‘s portfolio
regarding ESRM, facilitating the Board/RMC‘s decision making process where there are
unresolved E&S issues or non-compliance. The unit is also responsible for periodic reporting
to Bangladesh Bank and as/when required. Head of the SFU may be called upon by the Board
to opine on critical E&S issues of a particular transaction. The SFU is also responsible for
tracking latest E&S issues in the media and support transaction teams in identifying and
managing E&S risks in lending.

C. Screening Transaction
At the initial stage of evaluating a potential financial transaction, RO/CO should screen the
activities of the potential client to determine if it is an excluded activity. If the activity falls on the
Bank/FI‘s list of excluded activities, the financial transaction should not be considered. During the
initial screening the RO/CO should consider the Department of Environment (DoE) categorization
Organizational Structure for E & S Governance

--- Page 17 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

15
as it gives a sense whether the transaction is in a high risk sector. DoE categorization is important to
understand sectoral risk, but Banks/FIs will be required to complete the ESDD to identify
transaction specific risks.

D. Categorizing Transaction
To determine the extent of ESDD for a particular transaction, an E&S risk category needs to be
assigned to each transaction. The level of E&S risk varies greatly for different types of financial
transactions and by industry sectors. This provides an initial assessment of the E&S risk associated
with the transaction. Together with the findings of the E&S due diligence, this E&S risk category
can be incorporated into the overall risk assessment of a transaction and factored into the decision-
making process. This initial categorisation can be done by considering DoE categories of Green,
Orange A, Orange B and Red. A list of business categories is available in the Environment
Conservation Rules (ECR), 1997 and its subsequent amendments.

E. Conducting ESDD
Conducting ESDD on transactions is a critical component of a bank/FI's ESMS and its outcome
needs to be factored in the decision-making process for proceeding with a transaction. The purpose
of the E&S appraisal is to:
a) Identify and assess potential E&S impacts and issues, both adverse and beneficial, associated
with a proposed investment project;
b) Conduct a gap analysis to define areas of project noncompliance with the requirements of
the national laws
c) Assess the commitment and capacity of the client to manage identified impacts and define
remedial measures as needed;
d) Evaluate the quality and adequacy of the client‘s ESMS and practices to avoid, minimize, or
mitigate adverse impacts, and define remedial measures as needed;
e) Identify measures to avoid, minimize, mitigate, or offset/compensate for adverse impacts on
workers, affected communities, and the environment;
f) Design an E&S Action Plan (ESAP) addressing all deficiencies and non-compliances
discerned during the appraisal containing specific tasks designed to close all significant
gaps;
g) Ensure that the investment contracts (e.g., loan documentation) include appropriate
definitions, covenants, clauses and associated elements to obligate the client to comply with
all E&S laws and regulations, the ESAP, and applicable sections of general and sector-
specific checklists; and stipulate progress and performance reporting obligations;
Banks and FIs need to refer to the ESDD checklist only for carrying out the ESDD. The ESDD
checklists will auto generate the E&S risk ratings – high, medium and low based on the responses
provided to the questions in the checklist.
The process of E&S due diligence, filling in the ESDD checklists can involve a simple desktop
review or may require a site visit with the use of technical experts, if necessary, to understand
potential E&S risks associated with business activities and review a client‘s compliance with the
Bank/FI‘s E&S requirements. Relevant documents have to be collected to support E&S findings.
The ESDD checklist has relevant guidance for bankers to assist in collecting proof points. Below are
typical steps for conducting ESDD.

--- Page 18 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

16
Step1- Exclusion List: Screening of the project against a list of excluded activities adopted
by the financial institution;
Step 2- DoE Categorization: Review of industry sector and environmental and social
issues that are typically associated with this type of operation. The loan/investment
applications do not fall into any category (Red/Orange A/Orange B/Green) defined by DoE,
will be categorised as 'others' under this guidelines;
Step 3- ESDD:
o Review the project‘s compliance with applicable national environmental and social
regulations;
o Review the project sponsors‘ track record on environmental and social issues, in terms of
potential non-compliance with national regulations or negative publicity;
o Review the project‘s compliance against international standards or industry best practice
regarding environmental and social issues; and
o Documenting all required information. Every loan file should have a fully completed E&S
checklist, copies of all permits, clearances (DoE clearance certificate, fire license, buyer‘s
financial audit report by external auditors), ESAP, E&S Covenants in loan agreement and after
disbursement subsequent supervision reports.
Step 4- Generate Risk Rating: Upon completion of the relevant checklist a risk rating
(High, Medium, or Low) will be generated automatically.
Step 5- ESAP: For High and Medium Risk transaction, a time bound action plan and
relevant covenants have to be included in the loan documentation.
Step 6- Escalation: Depending upon the risk rating, the transaction has to be escalated to
the relevant authority. Please refer to the escalation matrix (Annex-3) for the process to be
followed.
Step 7- Monitoring: Review of the proposed actions (if any) to mitigate potential
environmental and social issues associated with the project throughout all phases of the project
life cycle.
Step 8- Reporting: The banks/FIs will have to report both internally to senior management
and also externally to Bangladesh Bank, shareholders on their sustainability performance.

--- Page 19 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

17
The banks/FIs have to document all findings from the due diligence, which will be considered
during the decision-making process before proceeding with a transaction. The banks/FIs also need
to ensure that the findings are reviewed and factored in to the decision-making process. The
following flow chart summarizes the steps to be followed while conducting ESDD.


Step 1 - EXCLUSION LIST SCREENING:
Is the project involved in activities listed under the Exclusion List?
YES
(Reject the project)
NO
Step 2 – DoE Categorization
Agri/cottage/
micro/retail/tr
ading/Small
Finance
(non-critical
sectors)
Agri/Small/Medium Enterprises
Finance
Large
Enterprises Finance
Infrastructure Project Finance
(ESIA Required)
Step 3 - E&S DUE DILINGENCE:
Review the project‘s compliance with applicable national E&S regulations;
Review the project sponsors‘ track record on E&S issues;
Review the project‘s compliance regarding E&S issues; and
Document all required information: Completed E&S checklist, copies of all permits, clearances.
Step 4 - GENERATE E&S RISK RATING:
 Based on the results of the ESDD Checklist (Annex 2), the E&S risk rating will be
automatically generated
LOW RISK
MEDIUM
HIGH RISK
Step 5: ESAP: For High and Medium Risk transaction, a time bound action
plan and relevant covenants will have to be included in the investment
documentation.
Step 6: Escalation: Depending upon the risk rating, the transaction will have to be
escalated to the relevant authority. Please refer to the escalation matrix (Annex-3) for the
process to be followed.
Step 7 Monitoring: Review of the proposed actions (if any) to mitigate potential environmental and social
issues associated with the project throughout all phases of the project life cycle.
Step 8 Reporting: The Banks/FIs will have to report both internally to senior management and also externally
to Bangladesh Bank, shareholders on their sustainability performance

--- Page 20 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

18
F. Decision making process
Once the ESDD is completed the checklist will auto generate a risk rating- High, Medium or Low.
High Risk: Transactions typically involve clients with business activities with significant
adverse E&S impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. A potential impact is
considered sensitive if it may be irreversible (such as loss of a major natural habitat), affect
vulnerable groups or ethnic minorities, involve involuntary displacement and resettlement, or
affect significant cultural heritage sites.
Medium Risk: Transactions typically involve clients with business activities with specific
E&S impacts that are few in number, generally site-specific, largely reversible and readily
addressed through mitigation measures and international best practice. Potential adverse
environmental impacts on human populations or environmentally important areas are less
adverse than those of High Risk transactions.
Low Risk: Transactions typically involve clients with business activities with minimal or
no adverse E&S impacts.
All the low risk transactions may be approved by usual approval tier designated by the
Credit/Investment Policy of bank/FI. All the medium risk transaction will be escalated to CRMC for
approval. All the high risk transactions will be escalated to the Board, after review by the MD, for
approval. In absence of the Board, the high risk transactions can be approved by the Executive
Committee.

G. Corrective Action Plan and Covenants:
For Medium and High Risk projects there will be identified risks which will have to be mitigated. A
corrective action plan needs to be developed by identifying the risk, mitigation measure, timeline for
implementation and who should be responsible for implementation. Transaction specific corrective
action plan and covenants can be part of the legal loan documents. A template of the corrective
action plan is provided in Annex-6 and different types of covenants are outlined in Annex-5.

H. Monitoring:
Once a transaction has been approved, the bank/FI needs to monitor the client‘s ongoing compliance
with the E&S clauses stipulated in the legal agreement. E&S risks or compliance status may change
from the time of transaction approval.
From the time of transaction approval, E&S regulations may become more stringent, the client may
modify its operations or production processes in a way that exacerbates previously identified risks
or present new E&S risks. Managing emerging E&S risks at the transaction level ensures effective
E&S risk management at the portfolio level.
A bank/FI‘s ESMS needs to explain the process for systematic monitoring on a periodic basis, such
as by implementing procedures for verifying compliance with E&S requirements including
implementation of any corrective action plans to resolve non-compliances. The frequency and
extent of monitoring will depend on the complexity of E&S issues associated with a client‘s
operations.
The monitoring process generally involves a review of periodic E&S performance reports submitted
by the client and regular site visits of the client‘s operations. Special attention needs to be paid to:
Assessing implementation of any mitigation measures specified in the corrective action
plan
Monitoring for valid E&S permits or licenses

--- Page 21 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

19
Any fines and penalties for non-compliance with E&S regulations
Recent reports from the relevant regulator or inspection authority confirming compliance
with specified laws, including any emissions measurements proving that emissions are below
the permitted limits
E&S occurrences including major accidents or incidents associated with a client‘s
operations such as worker injuries and spills
Media attention to E&S issues related to the client
Any complaints submitted by stakeholders about a client
If bank/FI identifies E&S issues, such as a client‘s non-compliance with the E&S clauses stipulated
in the legal agreement, they will follow up with the client to resolve these in a reasonable
timeframe. Depending upon the complexity of the E&S issues associated with a client‘s operations,
Bank/FI will require a new corrective action plan and/or periodic reports on E&S performance
throughout the duration of the transaction. The reporting frequency needs to be tailored to each
individual transaction. Banks and FIs need to refer to the monitoring checklist (Annex-7) for
documenting their findings during the monitoring process.

I. Managing Eventualities in Investment Projects:
Non-routine events do occur in conjunction with business development, with consideration of new
clients and investments, during appraisal, and in the post-commitment monitoring cycle. Some
common eventualities may include:
Direct complaints made to the bank for investing in environmentally or socially harmful
projects.
Negative media report/ Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) campaign about a
particular transaction which the Bank/FI has financed
Serious accidents, incidents including fatalities
Worker unrest, riots, demonstration on the roads
As soon as the RO knows about any such occurrence, the RO will immediately inform Head of
Business, collect factual information about the event, conduct a site visit and develop an action plan
to mitigate the occurrence of such event in the future and communicate to the client what
implication there might be due to the event. There might also be requirement of re visiting the risk
rating in light of the recent event.

J. Internal/External Communication:
A bank/FI's ESMS needs to include periodic reporting on the E&S performance of transactions and
measures taken to reduce its overall exposure to E&S risk. Bank/FI will compile all E&S findings
from monitoring clients and aggregate findings at the portfolio level. By analysing this information,
the bank/FI can have a better understanding of its overall exposure to E&S risk through its portfolio.
E&S performance reports typically include information on:
Portfolio breakdown by business line, industry sector and E&S risk category
Overall exposure to E&S risk and performance
High-risk transactions and E&S due diligence process prior to transaction approval
Major E&S risks of individual transactions, including cases of non-compliance
Significant E&S accidents or incidents related to a transaction
Implementation and changes in the Bank/FI‘s ESMS

--- Page 22 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

20
6. Implementing ESMS

Once the ESMS has been developed and formally approved by the BoD, it will be institutionalized
accordingly. To implement the ESMS, the bank/FI will develop an implementation plan, including
an ESMS testing phase, with a time schedule for completing each task and the designated staff
responsible for doing so. Tasks will include a review of the E&S regulations of the country in which
the Bank/FI operates, testing phase, communications and training plan for employees, assigning
responsibilities to applicable officials, review of international best practice that apply to clients and
review of the ESMS on a periodic basis for continuous improvement.
When properly designed and implemented, the additional workload for officials and transaction
costs associated with the ESMS are limited, especially when E&S risk management procedures are
fully integrated into the bank/FI‘s existing risk management framework.
Senior Management has to be informed of challenges, successes and other important issues
associated with the implementation of the bank/FI‘s ESMS. The SFU of each bank in consultation
with relevant business teams and credit related departments will take the coordinating role for
implementation.

7. Provision of Incentives and Disincentives

On the basis of the performance of the borrower(s) and banks and FIs dealing with transactions with
high ESRR, incentives and disincentives need to be considered for the following.

7.1. High ESRR at transaction/application/proposal level

The BoD of the bank/FI is authorised to consider the provision of incentives and disincentives for
projects that have high pre-disbursal ESRR. During post-disbursal monitoring of the performance of
the project, if change in ESRR is observed, the following options may be considered, provided any
change to the interest rate and repayment term has to be incorporated as part of the loan agreement
linked with changes in ESRR.

Table 2: Options for incentives and disincentives
Sl.
No
Particulars
Probable option(s)
Incentive(s) if
change in ESRR is
positive
 Issuance of appreciation letter and upload the name of project
on bank‘s website
 Reduction in interest rate
 Higher debt-equity ratio for borrowers
 Flexibility in loan conditions
 Favourable loan to value ratio for borrowers
Disincentive(s) if
change in ESRR is
negative
 Increase in interest rate (within the concurrent regulatory cap)
 Lower debt-equity ratio for borrowers
 Tougher loan covenants/conditions
 Tougher loan to value ratio for borrowers

--- Page 23 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

21
7.2. High ESRR at portfolio level
The purpose of these Guidelines is to encourage banks and FIs to better understand E&S risks and
incorporate appropriate risk mitigation measures to be able to expand the lending portfolio rather
than avoid investing in high E&S risks.
Bangladesh Bank will monitor the share of high ESRR transactions of individual banks or FIs in
total loan profile and actions taken by the boards for high ESRR transactions. Bangladesh Bank will
consider the following options with respect to the performance of banks and FIs towards meeting
the sanction target for high ESRR projects:
 Impact in CAMELS rating;
 Impact on liquidity and capital requirements;
 Impact on credit growth;
 Impact on profit distribution.

--- Page 24 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

22
8. Annex-1: Exclusion List

Sl.No.
Sector / Activities
Production or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country laws or
regulations or international conventions and agreements, or subject to international bans,
such as pharmaceuticals, pesticides/herbicides, ozone depleting substances, PCB's,
wildlife or products regulated under the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (CITES).
Links:
United
Nations
(UN)
list
of
banned
chemicals
and
products:
http://www.un.org/esa/coordination/Consolidated.list-13FinalFinal.pdf
https://cites.org/sites/default/files/eng/app/2017/E-Appendices-2017-10-04.pdf
Ship breaking/ trading activities which include:
1. Ships with prevalent asbestos use (for e.g. passenger cruise);
2. Ships not certified ―gas free‖ for hot work
Drift net fishing, deep sea bottom trawling, or fishing with the use of explosives or
cyanide
Hydraulic horn and >75 decibel horns, polypropylene and polythene bags, two stroke
engines.
Operations impacting UNESCO World Heritage Site and/or Ramsar site
Illegal logging, and logging operations or conversion of land for plantation use in
primary tropical moist forests
Production or activities involving forced labour/ child labour
Production or trade in:
1. Weapons and munitions
2. Tobacco in any form
3. Gambling, casinos
4. Pornography (goods/stores/web-based)
5. Brick production through Fixed Chimney Kiln (FCK)
Production or activities that impinge on the lands owned, or claimed under adjudication,
by Indigenous Peoples, without full documented consent of such peoples



9. Annex-2: ESDD Checklist

Please refer to the excel based E&S Risk Assessment Tool.

--- Page 25 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

23
10. Annex-3: Escalation Matrix

Risk
rating
Proposing Stage
Approval Stage
Disbursement
Stage
Low
 ESDD Checklist is to be completed by RO, approved by official(s) of CRM/IRM in head
office/branch and processed as per normal credit process for both existing and new clients
Medium
RO & Unit Head of ESRM
to sign off jointly for new or
existing
clients
with
proposals to:
 PROCEED with ESDD
submission but proper
justification is
to
be
provided.

Escalation
Process
if
CRM/IRM
official feels the transaction needs to
be escalated:
1. CRM/IRM official will be the first
point of review
2. If identified risk(s) is unresolved,
proceed for review by Sustainable
Finance Department and approval
by Country/ Region Head of Credit
3. Credit approval by the Head of
CRM/IRM can only be granted
subsequent to resolution via above
steps
4. Time-bound action plan to mitigate
risks may form part of approval
conditions
If there are any
conditions
to
be
fulfilled as part of
approval,
Credit
Risk
Management
Committee
(CRMC) will check
for the same before
disbursing
High
Concerned RO & ESRM
Officials to sign off jointly
for new or existing clients
with proposals to:
 REJECT (with reasons
documented for record);
or
 PROCEED with ESDD
submission but proper
justification is
to
be
provided
Escalation Process:
1. CRM/IRM official will be the first
point of review
2. If identified risk(s) is unresolved,
proceed for review by Country/
Region Head of Credit and Head of
Sustainable Finance Department
3. All high risk projects are to be
escalated to Board/(to EC if Board
meeting has not been held within
the
given
time)
with
recommendation from Head of
Credit.
4. Credit approval can only be granted
subsequent to resolution via above
steps
5. Time-bound action plan to mitigate
risks may form part of approval
conditions
If there are any
conditions
to
be
fulfilled as part of
approval,
CRMC
will check for the
same
before
disbursing

--- Page 26 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

24
11. Annex-4: E&S Risks in Detail

(A) Air emissions and Air Quality - Emissions of air pollutants can occur from a wide variety of
activities during construction, operation and decommissioning of a client's operations. Air emissions
are typically associated with processes such as combustion, storage of materials or other industry-
sector specific processes and can be:
 Point sources: These are discrete, stationary, identifiable sources of emissions (such as a
specific stack, vent or other discrete point of emission) that release pollutants to the atmosphere.
They are typically located in manufacturing or production plants. Point sources are characterized
by the release of air pollutants typically associated with the combustion of fossil fuels, such as
nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide (CO), and particulate matter
(PM), as well as other air pollutants including certain volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and
metals that may also be associated with a wide range of industrial activities.
 Fugitive sources: These are emissions that are distributed spatially over a wide area and
originate in operations where exhausts are not captured and released through a stack. Fugitive
emissions have the potential for much greater ground-level impacts than stationary source
emissions, since they are discharged and dispersed close to the ground. The two main types of
fugitive emissions are Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) and Particulate Matter (PM). Other
contaminants (NOx, SO2 and CO) are mainly associated with combustion processes designed to
deliver electrical or mechanical power, steam and heat.
 Mobile sources: These are emissions associated with vehicle use and include CO, NOx,
SO2, PM and VOCs. Emissions can be reduced by implementing a regular vehicle maintenance
and repair program, instructing drivers on better driving practices that reduce both the risk of
accidents and fuel consumption, replacing older vehicles with newer, more fuel efficient
alternatives, converting to cleaner fuels and installing emissions control devices such as catalytic
converters.
Air emissions of concern typically include:
 VOCs: Emissions of VOCs are associated with industrial activities that produce, store and
use VOC-containing liquids or gases in particular where the material is under pressure. Typical
sources include equipment leaks (from valves, fittings and elbows), open vats and mixing tanks,
storage tanks, unit operations in wastewater treatment systems and accidental releases.
Emissions can be reduced by modifying equipment, regularly monitoring equipment to detect
and repair leaks, using less volatile substances such as aqueous solvents and collecting vapours
through air extractors.
 PM: Dust or PM is released during certain operations such as the combustion of fossil fuels,
open storage of solid materials, and from exposed soil surfaces, including unpaved roads.
Emissions can be reduced through dust control methods such as covers, water suppression, or
increased moisture content for open materials storage piles, or controls (such as a bag house or
cyclone).
 Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS): Ozone depleting substances (ODSs) include
chemicals, which have been scheduled for phase-out under the Montreal Protocol on Substances
that Deplete the Ozone Layer. Systems or processes using chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), halons,
1,1,1-trichloroethane (methyl chloroform), carbon tetrachloride, hydrochlorofluorocarbons
(HCFCs), hydrobromofluorocarbons (HBFCs), and methyl bromide should be gradually phased

--- Page 27 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

25
out or not used at all as determined by national regulations. These chemicals are typically used
in a variety of applications including refrigeration, air conditioning, manufacturing foam
products, solvent cleaning, aerosol propellants, fire protection systems and as crop fumigants.
 Greenhouse Gases (GHGs): GHGs, as defined under the Kyoto Protocol to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, include carbon dioxide (CO2), methane
(CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur
hexafluoride (SF6). GHGs can be generated by a facility‘s production processes as well as from
the production of power (on-site or off-site) for use by the facility. Emissions can be reduced
through mechanisms such as carbon financing, energy efficiency, sustainable forms of
agriculture and forestry, use of renewable forms of energy, carbon capture and storage
technologies, recovery and use of methane in waste management and energy distribution.
 Sulfur dioxide (SO2): Sulfur dioxide (SO2) is mainly produced by the combustion of fuels
such as oil and coal and as a by-product from some chemical production or wastewater
treatment processes. Emissions can be reduced through the use of alternate fuels such as low
sulfur coal, light diesel or natural gas, emissions control technologies.
 Toxics (mercury): Mercury exists as elemental mercury, inorganic mercury compounds
(primarily mercuric chloride), and organic mercury compounds (primarily methyl mercury). All
forms of mercury are toxic and each form exhibits different health effects. A major source of
exposure to elemental mercury is through inhalation in the work place. Sources of inorganic
mercury compounds are generally low as their use has mostly been banned but limited exposure
can occur through the use of old cans of latex paint. Sources of methyl mercury include
fungicide-treated grains and meat from animals fed with treated grain.

(B) Water use and conservation - A client's operations use water in various production processes,
which vary by industry sector. Typically, water use at the facility level is associated with processes
such as described here.
Process water: Processes that typically use large quantities of water include washing
machines, rinsing, water jets or sprays to keep conveyors clean or to cool product, and the use of
tanks, which are refilled to control losses. Opportunities for reducing water use exist through
water reuse, improved equipment maintenance and better process design.
Building facility operations: Consumption of building and sanitary water is typically less
than that of industrial processes. Areas for reducing water use include repairing leakages and
installing water-saving devices.
Cooling systems: Once-through cooling systems with cooling towers use large quantities of
water and can be replaced by closed circuit cooling systems. Fresh water use can also be
reduced by replacing it with treated water.
Heating systems: Closed heating systems based on the circulation of low or medium
pressure hot water may consume large quantities of water if they leak and are poorly maintained.
In some cases, large quantities of water may be used by steam systems but water use can be
reduced through steam recovery systems and improved systems operations.

(C) Wastewater and water quality - A client's operations generate wastewater, which is treated on
site and/or discharged either to the municipal sewage system for treatment or directly to the
environment (surface water) without prior treatment. Wastewater includes process wastewater,

--- Page 28 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

26
wastewater from utility operations, storm water and sanitary wastewater. Wastewater will vary in
quality and quantity by industry sector and typically includes:
 Process wastewater: Pollutants may include acids, bases, and many others. These include
soluble organic chemicals, suspended solids, nutrients (phosphorus and nitrogen), heavy metals
(such as cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, nickel and zinc), cyanide, toxic organic
chemicals, oily materials and volatile materials. The costs of treating process wastewater can be
significant.
 Wastewater from utilities operations: Utility operations such as cooling towers and
demineralization systems may result in high rates of water consumption, as well as the potential
release of high temperature water containing high dissolved solids, residues of biocides and
residues of other cooling system anti-fouling agents.
 Storm water: Storm water includes any surface runoff and flows from process and materials
staging areas resulting from precipitation or drainage. Typically storm water runoff contains
suspended sediments, metals, petroleum hydrocarbons, Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
(PAHs) and coliform. Rapid runoff, even of uncontaminated storm water, also degrades the
quality of the receiving water by eroding stream beds and river banks.
 Sanitary wastewater: This may include effluents from domestic sewage, food service and
laundry facilities serving site employees and can also include other sources such as from
laboratories, medical infirmaries, equipment maintenance shops and water softening.

(D) Wastes - A client's operations may generate, store, or handle any quantity of hazardous or non-
hazardous waste across a range of industry sectors.
Waste can be solid, liquid, or contain gaseous material that is discarded by disposal, recycling,
burning or incineration. It can be a by-product of a manufacturing process or an obsolete
commercial product that can no longer be used for its intended purpose and requires disposal.
Inappropriate waste disposal practices can lead to contamination of ground water or potential fines
and/or penalties as stipulated in national regulations.
Solid (non-hazardous) waste generally includes domestic trash, inert construction/demolition
materials, metal scrap and empty containers (except those previously used to contain hazardous
materials, which should be managed as a hazardous waste), and residual waste from industrial
operations.
Hazardous waste shares the properties of a hazardous material (such as ignitability, corrosiveness,
reactivity, or toxicity), or other physical, chemical, or biological characteristics that may pose a
potential risk to human health or the environment if improperly managed. When a hazardous
material is no longer usable for its original purpose and is intended for disposal, but still has
hazardous properties, it is considered a hazardous waste. Typically, hazardous wastes include
solvents, fuels, and asbestos in building materials, PCB oils in electrical equipment, most pesticides,
and ozone depleting substances in refrigeration systems. Wastes may also be defined as ―hazardous‖
by local regulations or international conventions, based on the origin of the waste and its inclusion
on hazardous waste lists or based on its characteristics. Hazardous wastes should always be
segregated from non-hazardous wastes.
Facilities that generate and store wastes need to consider issues linked to waste minimization,
generation, transport, and disposal. Typically, approaches to waste management include:

--- Page 29 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

27
 Waste management planning. Facilities that generate waste should characterize their waste
according to composition, source, types of wastes produced, generation rates, or according to
local regulatory requirements. This information can be used to identify opportunities for
pollution prevention, such as source reduction, reuse, and recycling.
 Waste prevention. Processes can be designed and operated to prevent, or minimize, the
quantities of wastes generated and hazards associated with the wastes generated. This can be
accomplished by substituting raw materials or inputs with less hazardous or toxic materials, or
with those where processing generates lower waste volumes, and improving manufacturing
processes to convert materials more efficiently.
 Recycling and reuse. The total amount of waste can be significantly reduced through the
implementation of recycling and reuse plans. This entails identifying and recycling products that
can be reintroduced into the manufacturing process or industry activity at a site or in industrial
processing operations located at other facilities. It also includes identifying materials that can be
reused, saving both costs and disposal needs.
 Treatment and disposal. If waste materials are still generated after the implementation of
feasible waste prevention, reduction, reuse, recovery and recycling measures, waste materials
should be treated and disposed of while considering all measures to avoid potential impacts to
human health and the environment. Typical treatment and disposal methods include on-site or
off-site biological, chemical, or physical treatment of the waste material to render it non-
hazardous prior to final disposal; and treatment or disposal at permitted facilities specially
designed to receive the waste.
 Hazardous waste storage. Hazardous waste should be stored so as to prevent or control
accidental releases to air, soil, and water resources. This requires the need for storage in closed
containers away from direct sunlight, wind and rain; secondary containments; and the provision
of adequate ventilation where volatile wastes are stored.
 Hazardous waste transportation. On-site and off-site transportation of waste should be
conducted using appropriate protocols to prevent or minimize spills, releases, and exposures to
employees and the public. All waste containers designated for off-site shipment should be
secured and labelled with the contents and associated hazards, and be properly loaded on the
transport vehicles before leaving the site.
 Hazardous treatment and disposal. In the absence of qualified commercial or government-
owned waste vendors, facilities generating waste should have the technical capability to manage
the hazardous waste or install on-site waste treatment or recycling processes in a manner that
reduces immediate and future impacts to the environment. This may also require the need for
applicable permits, certifications, and approvals.
 Small quantities of hazardous waste. Hazardous waste materials are frequently generated in
small quantities by many projects through a variety of activities such as equipment and building
maintenance activities. Waste storage collection and storage areas should be visually inspected
on a regular basis for evidence of accidental releases and to verify that wastes are properly
labelled and stored. These types of wastes include spent solvents and oily rags, empty paint
cans, chemical containers; used lubricating oil; used batteries (such as nickel-cadmium or lead
acid); and lighting equipment, such as lamps or lamp ballasts.

--- Page 30 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

28
(E) Land contamination - Land can become contaminated due to releases of hazardous materials,
wastes, or oil, including naturally occurring substances.
Releases of these materials may be the result of historic or current site activities, including accidents
during their handling and storage, or due to poor management or disposal. Land is considered
contaminated when it contains hazardous materials concentrations, including oil, above baseline
and/or naturally occurring levels.
Contaminated lands may involve topsoil or subsurface soil that, through leaching and transport, may
affect groundwater, surface water, and adjacent sites. Where subsurface contaminant sources
include volatile substances, soil vapour may also create potential for contamination through
infiltration of indoor air spaces of buildings.
Land contamination is a concern when hazardous materials, waste, or oil are present in any
environment at potentially hazardous concentrations and the potential for contact with humans,
wildlife, plants, and other living organisms exists. This may occur when a contaminant migrates
from its point of release (e.g., leaching into potable groundwater) and humans or other living
organisms are exposed to it (e.g., through ingestion or skin absorption). This has potential risks to
human health(e.g., risk of cancer) and ecology and represents a liability to the polluter/business
owners (e.g., cost of remediation, damage of business reputation and/or business-community
relations) or affected parties (e.g., workers at the site and nearby property owners).
Land contamination should be avoided by preventing or controlling the release of hazardous
materials, hazardous wastes, or oil to the environment. When contamination of land is suspected or
confirmed during any project phase, the cause of the uncontrolled release should be identified and
corrected to avoid further releases and associated adverse impacts. Contaminated lands should be
managed to avoid the risk to human health and ecological receptors. This requires clean up reducing
the level of contamination at the site while preventing human exposure.

(F) Labour and Working Conditions - For any business, the workforce is a valuable asset, and a
sound worker-management relationship is a key ingredient to the long-term sustainability of the
enterprise. Failure to establish and foster a sound worker-management relationship can undermine
worker commitment and retention, result in labour strikes, and can jeopardize a client‘s operations.
A client‘s commitment to establishing a sound worker-management relationship encompasses the
following aspects:
 Human resources policy. A client should adopt a policy appropriate to its size and
workforce, which sets out its approach to managing employees. The policy provides information
regarding their rights under national labour and employment law, including their rights related to
wages and benefits.
 Working conditions and terms of employment. A client should document and communicate
to all employees and workers (including contract workers) their working conditions and terms of
employment. These include their entitlement to wages and benefits, hours of work, overtime
arrangements and overtime compensation, and leave for illness, maternity, vacation or holiday,
that at a minimum comply with national law. This includes respecting a collective bargaining
agreement with a workers‘ organization if there is such an agreement.
 Workers’ organizations. Where permitted by law, employees should be granted the right to
associate freely and to bargain collectively, by forming and joining workers‘ organizations or
through alternative means. A client should not discourage workers from forming or joining

--- Page 31 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

29
workers‘ organizations and should not discriminate or retaliate against workers who participate
in such organizations and bargain collectively.
 Non-discrimination and equal opportunity. A client should not make employment decisions
on the basis of personal characteristics unrelated to inherent job requirements but rather on the
principle of equal opportunity and fair treatment.
 Retrenchment. If a client anticipates the elimination of a significant number of jobs or a
layoff of a significant number of employees, it should develop a plan for managing the adverse
impacts on employees.
 Grievance mechanism. A client should provide all employees with a mechanism to raise
reasonable workplace concerns, confidentially or anonymously if needed, so that concerns can
be addressed promptly at the management-level without any retribution.
 Child labour and forced labour. A client cannot employ children in a manner that is
economically exploitative, or is likely to be harmful to the child or to interfere with the child‘s
education. A client cannot employ forced labour, which consists of any work or service not
voluntarily performed by an individual but executed under threat of force or penalty.
 Supply chain. A client should pay attention to unfair labour practices of its suppliers,
especially in instances where low labour cost is a factor in the competitiveness of supplies, and
ensure that this is not due to harmful labour practices.

(G) Community Health, Safety and Security - A client's operations can increase the potential for
community exposure to risks and impacts arising from accidents, structural failures, and releases of
hazardous materials. A client‘s operations often bring benefits to communities including
employment, services, and opportunities for economic development. However, these operations can
also increase the potential for community exposure to risks and impacts arising from accidents,
structural failures, and releases of hazardous materials. Communities may also be affected by
impacts on their natural resources, exposure to diseases, and the use of security personnel.
While acknowledging the public authorities‘ role in promoting the health, safety and security of the
public, it is also the client‘s responsibility to avoid or minimize these risks and impacts that may
arise from operations. This includes implementing the following actions:
 Consultation and grievance channels. Where appropriate, the client should conduct
consultations and establish a line of communication with the impacted community in order to
understand and monitor potential impacts. An appropriate consultation and grievance
mechanism can help manage and minimize potential risks, avoid reputational issues and reduce
the risk of conflicts with the community.
 Infrastructure and equipment safety. The client needs to ensure that operations are
conducted to prevent potential injury to the surrounding community, especially if aspects of the
operations are accessible to the community. If the client‘s operations involve operation of
moving equipment on public roads, the client needs to ensure that the necessary safety measures
are in place to prevent the occurrence of any incidents and accidents.
 Hazardous materials safety. The client needs to prevent or minimize the potential for
community exposure to hazardous materials that may be released during operations. If there is a
potential for life-threatening hazards, the client needs to modify operations or substitute or
eliminate substances causing the hazard. The client also needs to control the safety of deliveries
of raw materials and of transportation and disposal of wastes.

--- Page 32 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

30
 Environmental and natural resource issues. The client needs to avoid or minimize the
exacerbation of impacts caused by natural hazards, such as landslides or floods that could arise
from land use changes due to operations. This also includes avoiding or minimizing adverse
impacts due to operations on soil, water, and other natural resources used by the affected
communities.
 Community exposure to disease. The client needs to prevent or minimize the potential for
community exposure to water-borne or vector-borne disease, and other communicable diseases
that could result from operations. This also includes preventing or minimizing the transmission
of communicable diseases that may be associated with the influx of temporary or permanent
labour associated with the client‘s operations.
 Increase in traffic. Traffic, especially movement of heavy vehicles increases especially
during construction phase. This can lead to possible accidents/incidents which need to be
minimized. There is a need for traffic management plan and training of staff to manage and
minimize accidents/incidents.
 Emergency preparedness and response. The client needs to inform surrounding
communities of potential hazards associated with operations and collaborate with the
community and local government agencies in preparing to respond effectively to emergency
situations.
 Use of security personnel. A client may retain security personnel to safeguard its operations,
which may pose risks to the surrounding community if not managed properly. This includes
ensuring that security personnel have not been implicated in past abuses, have been adequately
trained in the use of force (including firearms, if necessary) as well as in the conduct toward
workers and the local community. The client will also provide a mechanism to allow the
surrounding community to express concerns about security personnel and will investigate any
allegations of unlawful or abusive acts of security personnel to take the necessary action to
prevent recurrence.

(G) Land Acquisition and Resettlement - Involuntary resettlement refers both to physical
displacement and to economic displacement due to land acquisition associated with a client's
operations. Involuntary resettlement refers both to physical displacement (relocation or loss of
shelter) and to economic displacement (access to resources for income generation or means of
livelihood) due to land acquisition (including rights-of-way) associated with a client‘s operations.
Resettlement is considered involuntary when affected individuals or communities do not have the
right to refuse displacement. This occurs in cases of: i) lawful expropriation or restrictions on land
use based on eminent domain; and ii) negotiated settlements in which the buyer can resort to
expropriation or impose legal restrictions on land use if negotiations with the seller fail.
Displaced persons may be classified as persons who:
 have formal legal rights to the land they occupy;
 do not have formal legal rights to land, but have a claim to land that is recognized or
recognizable under the national laws; or
 have no recognizable legal right or claim to the land they occupy.
Where it is unavoidable, appropriate measures to mitigate adverse impacts on displaced persons and
host communities should be carefully planned and implemented with appropriate disclosure of

--- Page 33 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

31
information, consultation, and the informed participation of affected persons. This includes
implementing the following actions:
 Compensation and benefits for displaced persons. When displacement cannot be avoided,
the client will offer displaced persons and communities‘ compensation for loss of assets at full
replacement cost and other assistance to help them improve or at least restore their standards of
living or livelihoods.
 Grievance mechanism. The client needs to ensure that a grievance mechanism is in place to
receive and address specific concerns about compensation and relocation that are raised by
displaced persons or members of host communities.
 Social impact assessment, resettlement planning and implementation. Where involuntary
resettlement is unavoidable, the client will conduct a census to identify the persons who will be
displaced by the project, understand the likely impacts on the affected persons and community,
develop entitlement framework and determine who will be eligible for compensation.
 Physical displacement. If people living on the site of a client‘s operations must move to
another location, the client will: i) offer displaced persons choices among feasible resettlement
options, including adequate replacement housing or cash compensation; and ii) provide
relocation assistance suited to the needs of each group of displaced persons, with particular
attention paid to the needs of the poor and the vulnerable. New resettlement sites built for
displaced persons will offer improved living conditions.
 Economic displacement. If land acquisition for the client‘s operations causes loss of income
or livelihood, the client will promptly compensate these persons, for example by compensating
affected business owners for the cost of re-establishing commercial activities elsewhere, for lost
net income during the period of transition, and for the costs of the transfer and reinstallation of
their business operations.
 Government-managed resettlement. Where land acquisition and resettlement are the
responsibility of the government, the client needs to collaborate with the responsible
government agency to the extent permitted by the agency to achieve outcomes that are
consistent with best international practice.

(H) Indigenous Peoples - Indigenous Peoples (IPs) are recognized as social groups with identities
that are distinct from dominant groups in national societies and are often among vulnerable
segments of the population. Indigenous Peoples may be referred to in different countries by such
terms as ―Indigenous ethnic minorities‖, ―aboriginals‖, ―hill tribes‖, ―minority nationalities‖,
―scheduled tribes‖, ―first nations‖, or ―tribal groups‖.
IPs typically self-identify as members of a distinct indigenous cultural group and are recognized as
such by others; have a collective attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral
territories, making use of natural resources in these habitats and territories; have customary cultural,
economic, social, or political institutions that are separate from those of the dominant society or
culture; and communicate in an indigenous language, often different from the official language of
the country or region.
Indigenous Peoples are often closely tied to their traditional or customary lands and the natural
resources on these lands. While these lands may not be under their legal ownership as defined under
national law, the use of these lands by communities of IPs for their livelihoods or for cultural
purposes is often recognized under customary law. However, the economic, social and legal status

--- Page 34 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

32
of Indigenous Peoples often limits their capacity to defend their interests and rights to lands and
natural and cultural resources. Indigenous Peoples are particularly vulnerable if their lands and
resources are transformed, encroached upon by outsiders, or significantly degraded. Their
languages, cultures, religions, spiritual beliefs, and institutions may also be under threat. These
characteristics expose Indigenous Peoples to different types of risks and severity of impacts,
including loss of identity, culture, and natural resource-based livelihoods, as well as exposure to
impoverishment and disease.
A client should ensure that during the course of operations, the identity, culture and natural
resource-based livelihoods of Indigenous Peoples are respected and exposure to impoverishment
and disease is prevented. This includes implementing the following actions:
 Avoid or minimize adverse impacts. When a client cannot completely avoid impacts on
Indigenous Peoples, the client needs to mitigate or compensate for these impacts in a culturally
appropriate manner and with the informed participation of affected Indigenous Peoples.
 Consultation. The client needs to establish an ongoing relationship with the affected
communities of Indigenous Peoples, which should be culturally appropriate. If there are adverse
impacts, the consultation process needs to ensure the free, prior, and informed consultation of
the Indigenous Peoples and facilitate their informed participation with respect to proposed
mitigation measures and sharing development benefits.
 Sharing development benefits. The client needs to identify opportunities for development
benefits for affected Indigenous Peoples. This should aim at improving their standard of living
and livelihoods in a culturally appropriate manner, including the long-term sustainability of the
natural resource on which they depend.
 Impacts on traditional or customary lands. If a client‘s operations are located within
traditional or customary lands or involve the commercial use of natural resources located on
these lands, this will generate adverse impacts on the livelihoods or cultural identity of the
community of Indigenous Peoples. The client needs to inform affected communities of their
rights under national laws, including the recognition of customary rights; make efforts to avoid
or at least minimize the size of the impacted land; and offer land-based compensation as well as
culturally appropriate development opportunities to affected communities.
 Relocation of Indigenous Peoples. The client should avoid the relocation of Indigenous
Peoples from their traditional lands. If relocation is unavoidable, the client needs to enter into a
good faith negotiation with the affected communities and ensure that any relocation complies
with best international standards.

(I) Cultural Heritage - Cultural heritage encompasses properties and sites of archaeological,
historical, cultural, artistic and religious significance as well as unique environmental features and
cultural knowledge, and practices of communities protected for future generations. Cultural heritage
encompasses properties and sites of archaeological, historical, cultural, artistic and religious
significance as well as unique environmental features and cultural knowledge, innovations and
practices of communities embodying traditional lifestyles, which are protected for current and future
generations. Consistent with the requirements of the Convention Concerning the Protection of the
World Cultural and Natural Heritage, a client is required to avoid significant damage to cultural
heritage due to their business activities.
Impacts on cultural heritage typical involve the following:

--- Page 35 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

33
 Chance finds. During the construction of a client‘s facility(s), there may be physical impacts
on previously unknown or undocumented resources that were fully or partially buried prior to
the start of construction.
 Community input. Where a project may affect cultural heritage, the client will consult with
affected communities who use, or have used, the cultural heritage for longstanding cultural
purposes to identify cultural heritage of importance. A client should incorporate the views of the
affected communities on cultural heritage into the decision-making process.
 Removal of cultural heritage. Most cultural heritage is best protected by preserving it in its
place, since removal is likely to result in irreparable damage or destruction of the cultural
heritage. Cultural heritage should only be removed if the client can demonstrate that the overall
benefits of operations at a particular site outweigh the anticipated loss of cultural heritage.
 Legally protected cultural heritage areas. When a client‘s proposed operations are located
within a legally protected area or a legally defined buffer zone, the client is required to take
additional measures to promote and enhance the conservation of the area.
 Use of cultural heritage. If a client makes commercial use of a community‘s cultural
heritage, such as embodiment of traditional lifestyles, the client is required to enter into a good
faith negotiation with the affected local communities and to provide fair and equitable sharing of
benefits from the commercialization of their cultural heritage.

--- Page 36 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

34
12. Annex-5: Covenants

E&S clauses can be incorporated into legal agreements with clients. This helps reduce a bank/FI's
exposure to potential E&S risks associated with a client's operations.
Bank/FI can incorporate E&S clauses into legal agreements with clients to require clients to comply
with the bank/FI‘s E&S requirements. Doing so helps a bank/FI reduce its exposure to the E&S
risks associated with a client‘s operations throughout the lifetime of a transaction and gives the
bank/FI legal recourse in the case of non-compliance.
A bank/FI‘s E&S Management System should state the circumstances under which specific E&S
conditions such as the need for a corrective action plan should be inserted into the legal agreement
for a proposed transaction.
The Legal Department should be involved in developing and inserting the necessary clauses on E&S
matters into legal agreements. The specific language will depend on the type of transaction and
potential E&S risks identified during the due diligence process but generally addresses the
following areas:
 Positive Covenants: Measures or actions to be taken by the client. These may include the
requirement for compliance with national E&S regulations and international standards, and
periodic reporting on E&S performance. In the event of significant accidents and incidents, with
potentially adverse E&S effects such as spills or workplace accidents resulting in death, serious
or multiple injuries or major pollution, the client is required to notify the bank/FI in a timely
manner, such as within 3 days.
 Negative Covenants: Actions that the client should refrain from undertaking. These include
the Bank/FI‘s E&S requirements.
 Conditions Precedent: Conditions and requirements that the client has to fulfil prior to
disbursement of funds by the bank/FI. These may include proof of valid permits and licenses,
preparation of government-requested reports and delivery of completion of mitigation actions
stipulated in the corrective action plan.
 Event of Default: An event that entitles the bank/FI to cancel a transaction and declare all
amounts owed by the client to become immediately due and payable. For transactions that
involve complex E&S issues, this may include specifying a time period such as 30 days during
which the client can resolve the issue after notification by the bank/FI.
 Corrective Action Plan: The Plan is typically included as an annex to the legal agreement,
outlining the specific mitigation actions to be taken by the client according to an agreed
timeframe for implementation.
To assess compliance with the E&S clauses stipulated in the legal agreement, bank/FI staff should
periodically monitor clients and, as necessary, require the preparation of a periodic E&S
performance report for review by the bank/FI. The bank/FI should consider material non-
compliances with the E&S clauses as a breach of contract, which constitutes an Event of Default
under the terms of the legal agreement.
In case of such an event, bank/FI staff needs to work with clients to resolve non-compliance issues
in order to ensure that any potential exposure of the bank/FI to the client‘s E&S risks is mitigated.
Where resolving the non-compliance issue is not possible, the bank/FI may be required to take legal
action against the client to reduce its exposure to the E&S risks associated with the transaction.

--- Page 37 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

35
13. Annex-6: Corrective Action Plan

Bank/FI will develop a corrective action plan with a timeframe for the client to implement
appropriate mitigation measures to comply with the bank/FI's E&S requirements.
Depending on the nature of E&S risks associated with a client‘s operations, bank/FI staff may
develop a corrective action plan with a timeframe for the client to implement appropriate mitigation
measures to comply with its E&S requirements. The purpose of a corrective action plan is to
mitigate potential E&S risks in the context of a transaction to an acceptable level for the bank/FI.
Bank/FI will tailor the scope of a corrective action plan to each client according to the specific risks
identified during the E&S due diligence process or during subsequent transaction monitoring.
Corrective action plans range from simple mitigation measures to detailed management plans with
actions that can be measured quantitatively or qualitatively. The corrective action plan should
include a description of the specific mitigation actions to be taken by the client, a timeframe for
implementation and a reporting requirement to inform the bank/FI on the status of completion.
Bank/FI needs to discuss the corrective action plan with the client and agree on its scope and
timeframe for completion. If the corrective action plan is developed as part of the transaction
appraisal process, it should be included in the legal agreement. The timeframe for implementation of
specific mitigation measures will vary according to the E&S risk and may range from being a
condition of transaction approval to a reasonable timeframe from disbursement or when E&S issues
were identified during transaction monitoring.
The following template can be used for documenting the corrective action plan agreed with the
client. The template also contains few examples for guidance.

--- Page 38 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

36
Table-Corrective Action Plan template with examples
Area of E&S concern
as identified through
ESDD
Corrective Actions required
Timeframe
Action completion indicator
Responsibility
(Client staff,
management or
board)
Cost
involved
Evidence
of
land
pollution
due
to
discharge of untreated
effluent
Action plan may include:
 Removal and treatment of
contaminated ground soil
 Construction
of
sewage
system
for
industrial
wastewater
 Construction of wastewater
treatment
facility
and
discharge
system
for
treated water
6 months
 Installation of Effluent Treatment
Plant (ETP). The ETP should be
operational
and
the
qualitative
parameters of treated effluent should
be within limits
 The discharge of treated effluent
should be through the constructed
discharge system and no other modes
of discharge and leakages
 Qualitative
parameters
of
treated
contaminated ground soil should be
within limits
BoD

Absence of grievance
redressal mechanism
Establish a grievance redressal
mechanism
3 months
Well established grievance redressal
mechanism
which
is
appropriately
communicated
to
the
external
stakeholders
Board

Displacement
of
community structure
Restoration
of
community
structure for common benefits
3 months

Senior
Management

Loss of trees, crops,
perennials
Compensating
for
standing
crops and trees
1 year
Plantation of trees
Senior
Management

--- Page 39 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

37
14. Annex-7: Monitoring Checklist

Sl. No.
Question /Issues to check
Response
Project Summary Information
Reporting period covered by this monitoring report

Specification of project stage (design, construction, operation or
closure stage)

Key developments and any major changes in project location and
design, if any from the time of loan disbursement or from the last
supervision period.

General Information
Status of implementation of covenants/corrective action plan. Is it in
line with the agreed timeframe? (i.e.,if all covenants are
implemented or partially implemented or not implemented or
delayed implementation).
If partially implemented or not implemented or delayed
implementation, RO to please mention the reason in the response
column along with a timeline for completion of implementation as
committed by the client during supervision.

EHS Management
If there was any incidence of accidents, spills, leakages, explosion
etc. during the reporting period.
If yes, what was the scale of damage (e.g. if there was any fatality,
monetary loss etc.)?
What was the action taken in response to the incident?

If there were any recent fines or penalties issued by the regulatory
body.
If yes, RO to please mention the nature of violation, amount of
fine/penalty paid, action taken by the client to address the issue to
avoid any such fine/penalty in future.

If there was any health & safety incident.
If yes, what was the extent of injury – minor, major or fatal?
What was the action taken in response to the incident?

If there are any new E&S risks or adverse impacts observed due to
client‘s operation.

RO to please mention the types of new E&S risks, the reason for
such new E&S risks, mitigation measures undertaken by the client to
address the E&S risks.

Permits and Compliance Certificates
All the required permits, licenses and clearances in place.

--- Page 40 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

38
Sl. No.
Question /Issues to check
Response
RO to please mention the issuance dates and duration of validity of
all such permits, licenses and clearances.
10
Other international management systems (for e.g. ISO 14000,
OHSAS 18001, SA8000) followed by the client and if they have
valid certifications for those management systems?

Grievance Redressal
11
If there have been any recent complaints, grievance or protest
received from local communities.

If yes, RO to please specify the nature of grievances; actions taken
by the client to resolve grievances and if there any outstanding issues
and measures proposed by the client to resolve them.

12
If there were concerns raised during the stakeholder consultations
carried out by the client during the reporting period.

If yes, what was the approach undertaken by the client to address
those concerns?

Other Information
13
Any other information pertaining to environmental matters,
management approach, community, media or NGO coverage that
need to be mentioned.

If there are any environment friendly initiatives, energy saving
equipment etc. that might be relevant for the Bank/FI.

--- Page 41 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

39
15. Annex-8: Developing an ESMS

Developing an ESMS requires senior management‘s lead and needs to be integrated with the
bank/FI's existing risk management framework. Developing an ESMS is most effective and
efficient if it is supported by senior management and integrated with the Bank/FI‘s existing risk
management framework.
An ESMS includes a policy, a set of procedures to identify, assess and manage E&S risks in
financial transactions and internal capacity of staff responsible for E&S management and
investments.

ESMS Template
The ESMS includes the banks/FIs‘ E&S policy and designated roles and responsibilities of its
officials. A standard ESMS template is provided below for the guidance which can be customized
as per organization‘s requirements.

Background
This Environmental & Social Management System (ESMS) details the policy, procedures and
workflow that will be followed for investments made by (―the Bank/FI‖) under the management
and administration of Head of Sustainable Finance Unit (SFU).

Environmental & Social Management System
2.1.
Policy
The Bank/FI continually endeavors to ensure effective E&S management practices in all its
activities, products and services with a special focus on the following:
 Ensuring that all activities undertaken by the Company are consistent with the Applicable
Requirements outlined later in this document
 Ensuring that all projects are reviewed against the Applicable Requirements
 Financing projects only when they are expected to be designed, built operated and
maintained in a manner consistent with the Applicable Requirements
 Making best efforts to ensure that all projects are operated in compliance with the
Applicable requirements on an ongoing basis, during the currency of the Company‘s
financing
 Ensuring transparency in its activities
 Ensuring that the management and the shareholders of the client companies understand the
policy commitments made by the Company in this area.

This Policy will be communicated to all staff and operational employees of the Company.

Signed by Managing Director/CEO


Effective Date


2.2.
Applicable Requirements
The Company will ensure that all projects are reviewed and evaluated against the following
Environmental & Social requirements
 The Exclusion List for all projects

--- Page 42 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

40
 The applicable national laws on environment, health, safety and social issues and any
standards established therein
 The IFC Performance Standards

2.3.
Procedures
 At an initial stage of inquiry, the RO/the designated official will apply Exclusion List to
the project. If the project involves an excluded activity, the prospective client will be so
informed, and further consideration of financing for the project will be terminated. Otherwise,
the Environmental coordinator will indicate the Applicable Requirements for the project.
 When the RO/the designated official indicates that the project does not involve an
excluded activity, the prospective client will be informed that the Company will undertake (if
required) an Environmental & Social Due Diligence (ESDD) as part of the appraisal process.
 The RO/the designated official will undertake (or appoint a consultant to undertake) an
ESDD. Depending on the complexity of the project, the ESDD can be a desk review, based on
a credit officer‘s site visit or require a full scale review conducted by a technically qualified
person or consultant.
 The client company must be able to demonstrate compliance to the Applicable
Requirements. Demonstration of compliance must be to the RO/the designated official‘s
satisfaction, although the opinion of third parties such as regulatory agencies can be sought.
Where compliance cannot be demonstrated, a Corrective Action Plan must be agreed to in
order for the investment to proceed. The plan must specify all of the necessary actions to
bring a project into compliance. A target completion date for each specified action must also
be agreed.
 Prospective clients must provide all requested information and the designated official
must have concluded that the Project is expected to meet the Applicable Requirements (with
Corrective Action if required) prior to the Company‘s decision to make an investment.
 E&S performance will be evaluated on an annual basis, including status of
implementation of the Corrective Action. The benchmark for performance will be the
ongoing compliance against the Applicable Requirements. Performance evaluation will be
undertaken by:
The Company‘s client companies, who will provide annual reports to the
Environmental Coordinator (or other designated officer), who may follow up as required
with further queries or site visits; and
The designated official, who will provide Performance Reports to the Management,
to be prepared on the basis of the Client annual reports provided to the Environmental
Coordinator (or other designated officer) and the ESDD and supervision conducted.
 All investment agreements will contain appropriate environmental representations,
warranties, and covenants requiring that projects are in compliance in all material respects
with host country environmental, health, safety and social requirements embodied by state
general laws and implementing agencies and conducted in accordance with any Applicable
Requirements.

--- Page 43 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

41
2.4.
Organization and Responsibilities
 Head of SFU will have oversight for environmental and social issues; will ensure
resources are made available for environmental management.
 A designated official from SFU will ensure the following issues:
During due diligence, the evaluation of environmental compliance of a target client
company with Applicable Requirements;
Supervising projects in the portfolio against on-going compliance with the
Applicable Requirements.
The preparation of an annual environmental performance report, based on the annual
performance report prepared by the client companies.
 The official from SFU will ensure that these procedures are implemented for each project,
and that records of environmental reviews are maintained.
 The official from SFU will ensure that all investment decisions are supported by
appropriate due diligence documentation (including, but not limited to, an environmental
section in each final Investment Memorandum).
 Legal Counsel will ensure that appropriate environmental representations, warranties, and
covenants are incorporated in each stock purchase agreement.

2.5.
Resources and Capabilities
 Head of SFU will work with Senior Management to ensure that adequate Company
resources have been committed to allow for the effective implementation of the environmental
policy and procedures of the Company.
 The official from SFU will need to be technical qualified to be able to carry out the due
diligence or review work carried out by a consultant.
 The official from SFU will maintain a file of qualified environmental consultants who can
be called upon to assist in conducting environmental reviews.

2.6.
Records to be maintained
 Environmental& Social Due diligence (ESDD) - This is the record of the Bank/FI‘s E&S
review of a project at the time of considering of the project for investment and forms
 E&S Supervision records for projects being supervised
 Reports to be provided to Company management

Annexure
3.1.
Exclusion List

IFC performance Standards
(Available at the IFC Website)

Carrying out the Environmental & Social Due Diligence (ESDD)
An ESDD is the record of the Company‘s review of a project at the time of appraisal that ensures
that a project is meeting and is expected to continue to meet the Applicable Performance
Requirements. An ESDD is based on all or some of the following:

--- Page 44 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

42
 Review of information in the public domain to check for any social and/or environmental
controversies/news related to the client.
 Review of project and environmental and social documents of the project
 Discussions with the Project Officials
 Site visit and discussions there

Suggested ESDD report outline
Cover issues as applicable
Background: Project Description, Site and Environment Setting, Land requirement,
Compliance with Applicable Requirements: Exclusion list, National Regulatory
requirements, (Performance Standards if required)
Environment Issues: Air Pollution, Water Pollution, Solid and Hazardous Wastes, Noise,
Site Health and Safety, Chemical Hazards and Emergency Management,
Resources Utilization : Water, Construction material, Other
Sensitive Receptors: Local Human settlements, Local Ecologically sensitive areas, Sites of
cultural importance
Social Issues: Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement, Indigenous Peoples,
Impact on local livelihood, Public Opinion and Consultation
Labor Relations: No Child or forced labor, Compliance with national labor laws
Project consultation and local Disclosure
Other project specific issues
Environment Management /Corrective Action Plan
Summary and Recommendations
Financing Covenants/Conditions

--- Page 45 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

43

16. Annex-9: List of Relevant National Regulations, International Treaties and
Best Practices

Key E&S
Areas
Relevant local regulation
Relevant international treaties
and conventions for which
Bangladesh is a signatory
Assessment
and
management
of E&S risks
and impacts
 National Environmental Policy, 2018
 Environment
Pollution
Control
Ordinance, 1977
 Environmental Quality Standards for
Bangladesh, 1991
 National
Environment
Management
Action Plan (NEMAP), 1995
 Environment Conservation Act, 1995 and
amended in 2010
 Environment Conservation Rules, 1997
and amended in 2003
 EIA Guidelines For Industry, 2021

Management
of
labour
related issues
such
as
recruitment,
wages,
occupational
health
and
safety
and
others
 Labour Policy 2012
 Bangladesh Labour Act, 2006
 Labour Welfare Foundation law 2006
 Bangladesh
Labour
(Amended)Law,
2013
 Labour Relations under Labour Laws,
1996
 National
Child
Labour
Elimination
Policy, 2010
 The Fire Prevention and Extinction Act,
2003
 Fire Prevention and Extinction Rules,
2014
 Bangladesh Factory Act, 1965
 Bangladesh Factory Rules, 1979
 OSH Policy, 2011
 The Employees State Insurance Act,
1948
 The Employer‘s Liability Act, 1938
 Maternity Benefit Act, 1950
 Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923
 The Employment of Children Act, 1938
 Bangladesh Industrial Act 1974
 Occupational Hazards Due
to Air Pollution, Noise and
Vibration (Geneva), 1977
 Prevention and Control of
Occupational
Hazards
(Geneva), 1974
 Occupational
Safety
and
Health
in
Working
Environment (Geneva), 1981
 Occupational
Health
Services (Geneva), 1985
Resource
efficiency
and pollution
prevention
 The
Environment
Pollution
Control
Ordinance, 1977
 National 3-R Strategy, 2010 (3R: Reduce,
Reuse and Recycle)
 Hazardous Waste and Ship Breaking
Waste Management Rules, 2011
 Biomedical Waste Management Rules,
 International Convention on
Climate
Change
(Kyoto
Protocol), 1997
 UN Framework Convention
on Climate Change (New
York), 1992
 International Convention on

--- Page 46 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

44
Key E&S
Areas
Relevant local regulation
Relevant international treaties
and conventions for which
Bangladesh is a signatory
2008
 Draft National Solid Waste Management
Rules, 2010
 Draft National River Conservation Act,
2011
Civil
Liability
for
Oil
Pollution
Damage
(Brussels), 1969
 Convention on Oil Pollution
(London), 1990
 UN Convention on the Law
of the Sea (Montague Bay),
1982
Community
health, safety
and security
 Disaster Management Act, 2012
 Public Health Emergency Provisions
Ordinance, 1994
 Biomedical Waste Management Rules,
2008
 Climate Change Act, 2010
 Draft National Solid Waste Management
Rules, 2010
 National Plan for Disaster Management
2010-2015
 Sound Pollution Law, 2006
 Ship Breaking and Hazardous Waste
Management Rules, 2010
 Water Supply and Sewerage Authority
Ordinance, 1963
 Noise Control Rules
 National Health Policy, 2011
 International Convention on
Climate
Change
(Kyoto
Protocol), 1997
 UN Framework Convention
on Climate Change (New
York), 1992
 International Convention on
Civil
Liability
for
Oil
Pollution
Damage
(Brussels), 1969
 Civil Liability on Transport
of
Dangerous
Goods
(Geneva), 1989
Land
acquisition
and
Involuntary
resettlement
 National Land Use Policy
 The Land Acquisition Act, 1894
 The Acquisition and Requisition of
Immovable Property Ordinance, 1982
 The Acquisition and Requisition of
Immovable Property Act, 2017

Biodiversity
conservation
and
sustainable
management
of
living
natural
resources
 National
Biodiversity
Strategy
and
Action plan (2004)
 Bangladesh Wildlife Conservation and
Security Act, 2012
 Bangladesh Wild Life (Preservation)
Act, 1974
 Bio Safety Rules, 2012
 Forest (Amendment) Act, 2012
 Forest Policy, 1994
 Social Forestry Rules, 2004
 National Forest Policy and Forest Sector
Review (1994,2005)
 Draft Tree Conservation Act, 2012
 The Private Forests Ordinance Act, 1959
 Forest Transit Rule, 2011
 Protocol on Biological Safety
(Cartagena Protocol), 2000
 UN Framework Convention
on Climate Change (New
York), 1992
 International Plant Protection
Convention (Rome), 1951
 International Convention on
Climate
Change
(Kyoto
Protocol), 1997
 Convention Relative to the
Preservation of Fauna and
Flora in Their Natural State
(London), 1933
 International Convention for

--- Page 47 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

45
Key E&S
Areas
Relevant local regulation
Relevant international treaties
and conventions for which
Bangladesh is a signatory
 Climate Change Act, 2010
 Deer Rearing Policy, 2009
 The Protection and Conservation of Fish
Act 1950
 Draft Wetland Policy, 1998
 The Protection and Conservation of Fish
Rules (1985)
 The Protection and Conservation of Fish
Act, 1950
 National Conservation Strategy, 1992
 Private Fisheries Protection Act 1889
 Marine Fisheries ordinance 1983
 Revised National Conservation Act,
2010
the
Protection
of
Birds
(Paris), 1950
 Convention on Wetlands of
International
Importance
Especially
as
Waterfowl
Habitat (Ramsar), 1971
 Convention
on
The
Conservation of Migratory
Species of Wild Animals
(Bonn), 1979
 Convention
on
Biological
Diversity (Rio de Janeiro),
1992
 Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species
of Wild Fauna and Flora
 UN Convention on The Law
of The Sea (Montague Bay),
1982
Indigenous
peoples
 Social Forestry Rules, 2004
 The Acquisition and Requisition of
Immovable Property Act, 2017
 The Land Acquisition Act, 1894

Cultural
heritage
 The Antiquities Act, 1968
 World Cultural and Natural
Heritage (Paris), 1972
IFC
Standards for
different
sectors
 IFC‘s Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines: Textile
Manufacturing
 IFC EHS Guidelines for Cement Manufacturing
 IFC EHS Guidelines for Construction Materials Extraction
 IFC EHS Guidelines for Tanning and Leather Finishing
 IFC EHS Guidelines for Ceramic Tile and Sanitary Ware Manufacturing
 IFC EHS Guidelines for Thermal Power Plants
 IFC EHS Guidelines for Nitrogenous Fertilizer Manufacturing,
 IFC EHS Guidelines for Phosphate Fertilizer Manufacturing,
 IFC EHS Guidelines for Pulp and Paper

--- Page 48 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

46

17. Annex-10: Guidance Note on Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA) under Environmental and Social Risk Management

1. Introduction: To have a detailed understanding of the impacts of any project or
industrial/manufacturing unit on different aspects of environment and society, Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) is inevitable. ESIA is a process for predicting and assessing the
potential environmental and social impacts of a proposed project; considering inter-linked socio-
economic and environmental impacts, both beneficial and adverse; evaluating alternatives and
designing appropriate mitigation, management and monitoring measures. ESIA explores ways and
means to mitigate adverse impacts of project activities, shape projects to adapt the local
environment and social set up, present the predictions and alternatives to decision-makers. It also
enables in carrying out environmental and social cost-benefit analysis of projects at the primary
stage.

2. Process of conducting ESIA:
2.1. Screening: Screening is a quick, high-level analysis to determine whether a full ESIA is
necessary.
2.2. Scoping: If a full ESIA is required, scoping determines which impacts are likely to be
significant and should become the main focus of the ESIA. Scoping also identifies data availability
and gaps.
2.3. Baseline studies: Baseline studies provide a reference point against which any future changes
associated with a project can be assessed and offer information for subsequent monitoring of
environmental and social performance.
2.4. Impact prediction and evaluation: Impact prediction and evaluation is the heart of the ESIA
and involves analyzing the impacts identified in the scoping and baseline work to determine their
nature, temporal and spatial scale, reversibility, magnitude, likelihood, extent and effect.
2.5. Mitigation: Mitigation aims to eliminate or reduce negative environmental and social impacts.
2.6. Consideration of alternatives: When all mitigation measures have been identified, a
comparison of alternatives will allow identification of the least damaging option.
2.7. Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP): This plan defines resources, roles
and responsibilities required to manage environmental and social impacts as well as implement
mitigation measures. The ESMP forms a link between the ESIA and the Environmental and Social
and Management System.
2.8. Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Report: The Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment Report is the physical report on the ESIA process and findings. This report
should provide a clear, jargon-free review of potential impacts and how they have been and will be
mitigated.

3. Standard Contents of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Report: The contents
and structure of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Report will definitely vary from
project to project.

--- Page 49 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

47
Yet, for better understanding of banks and FIs, minimum contents for a standard ESIA report are
given below:

Section-1: Introduction
Background
Objectives
1.2.1 Objectives of the Farm (Industry)
1.2.2 Objectives of ESIA
Scope of Work
Consistency with DOE Guidelines
Consistency with Bangladesh Bank Guidelines
Methodology
The ESIA Team (name, educational and work experience, Signature of all members)
Limitations
Acknowledgement
Section-2: The Project and its Baseline information
2.1.
Project Overview
2.2.
Type of Project and Capacity
2.2.1 Project Activities

2.2.2 Project Capacity
2.2.2.1 List and Quantity of Raw Materials used (Input)
2.2.2.2 List and Quantity of Finished Products (Output)
2.2.3 Manpower Required (Skilled/Unskilled; Male/Female)
2.2.4 Occupational Hazards
2.3.
Location of the Project
2.4.
Plant Layout
2.5.
ETP and Other Treatment Plants
2.6.
General Consideration about baseline information of the project
2.7.
Physio-Chemical Environment
2.7.1 Land
2.7.1.1 Surrounding Land Uses
2.7.1.2 Land Form and Soil Classification
2.7.2 Water Quality

2.7.2.1 Surface Water
2.7.2.2 Groundwater Quality
2.7.3 Air Quality
2.7.4 Meteorological
2.8.
Biological Environment
2.8.1 General Consideration
2.8.1.1 Flora
2.8.1.2 Fauna
2.9.
Socio-economic Condition
2.9.1 Demographics
2.9.2 Economy
2.9.3 Social Structure

--- Page 50 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

48
2.9.4 Education
2.10. Living and Cultural Standard
2.11. Agriculture
2.12. Housing
2.13. Public Health
2.14. Recreation
2.15. Industries and Commerce
Section-3: Public consultations
3.1.
General Consideration
3.2.
Methodology
3.3.
Information Disclosure and Consultations
3.4.
General Findings of the Meetings and Survey
3.4.1 Findings of Meeting
3.4.2 Findings of Survey
Section-4: Identification of potential impacts
4.1.
General Consideration
4.2.
Scoping of Impacts
4.2.1 Checklist
4.2.2 Graded Matrix
Section-5: Prediction, evaluation and mitigation measures of impacts
5.1.
General Consideration
5.2.
Impacts on Physio-Chemical Environment
5.2.1 Impact due to Liquid Discharge

5.2.2 Impact on Air Quality
5.2.3 Pollution from Solid Waste
5.3.
Impact on Socio-Economic Environment
5.3.1 Impact on Employment and Family Finance
5.3.2 Impact on Health and Safety
5.4.
Impact on Indigenous people
5.5.
Impact due to land acquisition
5.6.
Hydrological Impact
5.7.
Soil Erosion Investigation
5.8.
Geotechnical Investigation
Section-6: Environmental and social management plan
6.1.
General Consideration
6.2.
Mitigation/Benefit Enhancement Measures
6.3.
Monitoring Requirement
6.4.
Monitoring Indicators
6.5.
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
Section-7: Disaster Management Plan
7.1
General Consideration
7.2
Type of Hazards/Disaster
7.3
Disaster Management Plan (DMP)
Section-8: Conclusion and recommendations
8.1.
Conclusions

--- Page 51 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

49
8.2.
Recommendations
8.3.
List of Reference

Annex: List of Applicable policies and legislations
Industrial Policy 1991, 2005
National Environmental Policy 1992
National Conservation Strategy
National Environmental Management Action Plan (NEMAP)
Conventions, Treaties and Protocols
Bangladesh Environmental Conservation Act (ECA), 1995 (Amended in 2002)
Environment Conservation Rules (ECR) 1997 (Amended in 2003)
Environment Court Act, 2000
National Land-use Policy, 2001
Bangladesh Labor Act, 2006 (Amended in 2013)
Bangladesh National Building Code
National Agricultural Policy 1999 (Amended in 2013)
National Water Policy 1999
National Water Management Plan: Development Strategy (2011)
Bangladesh Water Act 2013
Guideline on Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Banks and Financial
Institutions in Bangladesh, 2017
National Fisheries Policy 1998

4. Eligibility criteria to be Third Party for conducting ESIA:
ESIA will generally be arranged by the borrowers at its own cost and submitted along with the loan
application. Banks/ FIs will ensure that ESIA is done through qualified third party. Qualification
criteria include: i) Capacity and ability to prepare ESIA following specific structure and to a high
standard. ii) Service provider‘s legal status, formation documents and availability of required
licenses or approvals for doing the service iii) Adequate experience and competence to prepare
ESIA iv) ESIA preparing team consists of at least 5 members.
Qualifications for members are as follows:
One member having Post graduate degree in Environmental Engineering/Earth and
Environmental sciences (Geography, Geology, Soil Science, Forestry)/Disaster science and
Management/ related subject with at least Five-year experience in relevant field.
One social safeguard specialist having post graduate degree in social science / Sociology/
related subject with at least Two-year experience in relevant field.
One certified energy auditor registered under Association of Energy Engineers (AEE) or any
other nationally or internationally recognized organization with at least Two-year experience in
relevant field.
2 other members graduated in agricultural/Civil/Water Recourse Engineering or
Environmental Science or related subject with at least Two-year experience in relevant field.

--- Page 52 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

50

18. Annex-11: Sector Specific Guidance Note on ESRM

Banks/FIs will use the industry specific ESDD if the project activities fall within the following
industries:

1. Textile and Apparel Sector
2. Tanning and Leather Finishing Sector
3. Cement Manufacturing Sector
4. Ceramic Tile and Sanitary Ware Manufacturing Sector
5. Fertilizer Manufacturing Sector
6. Pharmaceutical Sector
7. Ship Breaking Sector
8. Power Sector
9. Pulp & Paper Sector
10. Steel Re-rolling Sector

Objectives of the Sector Specific Guidance Note

The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM is to provide a high-level indicative summary of
potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and performance levels for transactions in
environmentally and socially sensitive sectors in Bangladesh. The scope of application will be fully
aligned with the Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and FIs complying applicable national regulations.
The standards of this guidance will be complied as the minimum requirements whereas bank/FIs
may prefer to the application of more stringent standards for the respective clients. A full and
detailed justification for any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific
environmental assessment. This justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate
performance levels is protective of human health and the environment.

--- Page 53 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

51
18.1. ESRM Guidance Note for Textile and Apparel Sector

1. Introduction
The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM for the Textile & Apparel Sector is to provide a high
level indicative summary of potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and performance levels
for transactions in the Textile & Apparel sector in Bangladesh. The scope of application will be
fully aligned with the Section 4 of Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and FIs. At all times, applicable
national regulations are to be followed. Where national regulations differ from the levels and
measures presented in this Guidance Note, loan proposals are expected to achieve whichever is
more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those provided in this Guidance Note are
appropriate, in view of specific loan proposal, a full and detailed justification for any proposed
alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This justification should
demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of human health and
the environment. For the purposes of this Guidance Note, Textile sector activities include, but are
not limited to: Yarn Production; Fabric Production; Washing, Dyeing and Finishing (WDF); Ready
Made Garment (RMG) Production; Polymer Synthesis and Natural Raw Material Production.

2. Industry Specific Impacts and Management

2.1.
Environmental Issues:
The major environmental concerns related to the Textile & Apparel sector in Bangladesh include
the following:
Hazardous materials management
Textile manufacturing activities may include the use of hazardous chemicals mainly during pre-
treatment and dyeing processes in WDF to provide the final product with desired visual and
functional properties. These chemicals include surfactants (e.g. detergents, lubricants etc.),
complexing agents (e.g. EDTA or polyphosphate), antifoaming agents (based on mineral oils or
hydrocarbons) and textile preservation agents (e.g. brominated and chlorinated compounds,
dieldrin, arsenic, and mercury).
The chemicals are potentially hazardous, toxic and persistent in nature that can have a very
damaging impact on the human health and the environment if not handled with proper care. The
key measure that can be taken to avoid or minimize the use of these hazardous materials is to
replace these agents with biodegradable or at least bio-eliminable compounds that do not contain
Nitrogen or Phosphate in their molecule. Some examples are:
For detergents / surfactants- APEO should be replaced with alcohol ethoxylates
For anti-foaming agents – mineral oil based antifoaming agents should be replaced with
agents based on silicones, phosphoric acid esters, high molecular alcohols, fluorine
derivatives
For complexing agents – EDTA should be replaced with polycarboxylic acids (e.g.
polyacrylates and polyacrylate-maleic acid copolymerisates), hydroxy carboxylic acids (e.g.
gluconates, citrates) and sugar-acrylic acid copolymers
For lubricants – mineral oil based lubricants should be replaced with water-soluble
lubricants
For flame retardants and cross linking agents – Agents with high formaldehyde levels
should be avoided

--- Page 54 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

52
In addition, recovery of auxiliary dyeing agents such as caustic soda (sodium hydroxide) by
evaporation techniques should be practiced. In all cases, chemicals prohibited by Section 6.2.1 of
the Oeko-Tex Association Standard 1000 (Oeko-Tex Association, 2006c) should be avoided in
textile manufacturing.
Wastewater
Wastewater is the most prominent environmental issue of the textile manufacturing process. WDF
is the major source of wastewater with high toxic load that, if not treated properly, may
significantly contaminate surface and ground water, adversely impacting the environment and
human health. These units treat fabrics with chemicals (e.g. dyes) and liquor baths and often require
several washing, rinsing, and drying steps, generating significant wastewater effluents. The
scouring process during Yarn Production to remove dirt, soil, grease from fibres also generate large
volume of alkaline wastewater. During the finishing process, water-polluting substances can
originate from the dyes themselves (e.g. aquatic toxicity, metals, colour), auxiliaries contained in
the dye formulation (e.g. dispersing agents, anti-foaming agents, etc.), basic chemicals and
auxiliaries used in dyeing processes (e.g. alkali, salts, reducing and oxidising agents, etc.) and
residual contaminants present on the fibre from yarn and fibre production (e.g. residues of
pesticides in cotton, grease, spin finishes on synthetic fibres). Because of presence of these
constituents, effluent streams from dyeing processes are typically alkaline with high BOD (from
700 to 2,000 mg/l) and COD loads, hot and coloured and may contain significant concentrations of
heavy metals (e.g. chromium, copper, zinc, lead, or nickel). The generation of wastewater can be
limited by the installation of Effluent Treatment Plants (ETP). In Bangladesh, in majority of WDF
units ETP is either not installed or if installed, is non-operational. Below is a list of common and
effective pollution prevention and control techniques that may be adopted in different stages of
WDF process depending on the requirement.
Recovery of heat from the final effluent should be practiced
Use of bio-degradable or bio-eliminable chemicals during pre-treatment, dyeing and
finishing processes should be adopted as discussed above
Optimization of mechanical removal of water prior to the drying process
Implementation of mechanical liquor extraction to reduce dye liquor carryover and improve
washing efficiency
Installation of ETP adhering to national standards
Adoption of Bio-filtration process in ETP (combined aerobic, anaerobic process)
Residual liquor during wet operations should be minimized through reduced application,
reduced tank volumes and padding liquor recycling
If possible, use of continuous and semi-continuous dyeing processes to reduce water
consumption with respect to more traditional batch dyeing processes
Replacement of chrome dyes with reactive dyes, liquid sulfur dyes with sulphide free or low
sulphide dyes, adoption of low-salt, pH controlled dyeing process as applicable
Water Consumption
The wet processing operations involved in WDF are water intensive. Water consumption in textile
manufacturing has a significant environmental footprint in terms of wastewater/sludge production,
ground and surface water contamination (impacting community health as well), and energy used in
water pumping and heating. Keeping these in mind, it is important to have water meters installed at
key processes and locations to track the quantity of water being consumed in various operations.
Some of the leading textile manufacturers in Bangladesh have gone for installation of water meters

--- Page 55 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

53
on dyeing and rinsing machines, leading to significant water and energy savings and this can be
replicated in other units in the country. Some of the effective techniques to optimize water
consumption are as follows:
Installation of water meters on dyeing and rinsing machines
Use of water flow control devices
Elimination of water leaks and reduced hose pipe use
Reuse of cooling water from dyeing machine
Reuse of dye baths, preparation and finishing water
Counter current rinsing or reusing waste water from one process for another with less
exacting water requirements. For example, using bleaching rinse water for textile washing
or washing the floor.
Air Emissions
Textile manufacturing operations that may generate significant sources of air pollutants include
Raw Material Production, Yarn Production and WDF. The possible sources of air emissions and the
mitigation measures are listed below. In addition there are exhaust gases from combustion of fossil
fuels for heat/steam generation.
Table- Sources of Air Emissions and Mitigation Measures:
Sector
Activities
Air Emissions
Mitigation Measures
Raw
Material
Production,
Yarn
Production
 Dust generated from cotton handling and
storage , synthetic staple processing
 Volatile
Organic Compound
(VOC)
emissions from solvent wash for removal of
water insoluble oils from fibres
 Enclosure
of
dust
producing
equipment, and use of local exhaust
ventilation;
 Use
of
dust
extraction
and
recycling systems to remove dust
from work areas;
 Installation of fabric filters to
prevent outdoor emissions.
WDF
 VOC emissions from organic solvents,
formaldehydes, ammonia, methanols etc.
used during fabric cleaning, printing, heating
processes; stenter frames used in dyeing
processes
 Odour from dyeing and other finishing
processes due to use of oils, solvent vapours,
formaldehyde,
sulfur
compounds,
and
ammonia
 Installing
and
modifying
equipment to reduce solvent use;
 Adopting water-based methods for
removing oil and grease from fabric
instead of using volatile solvents;
 Substituting
cleaning
solvents
with less toxic solvents, particularly
chlorinated solvents;
 Recovery of VOCs through vapor
recovery units, and use of a fully
closed-loop system, especially if
cleaning with halogenated organic
solvents cannot be avoided (e.g. for
fabrics that are heavily loaded with
silicone
oils)
using
appropriate
control technologies (e.g. diversion of
stack emissions
through boilers;

--- Page 56 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

54
installation
of
scrubbers
with
activated carbon slurries; installation
of activated carbon absorbers; or
incineration of extracted vapours in a
combustion system).
 Substituting
odour-intensive
substances
with
less
impacting
compounds (e.g. sulfur containing
dyestuffs
with
sulphide-free
dyestuffs)
 Capturing and recovering the off-
gases
from
the
processes
(e.g.
installation of heat recovery systems);
 Routing
of
stack
emissions
through boilers to reduce odour
emissions.
Energy consumption
Textile manufacturing may involve significant use of energy resources. Heat consumption is
particularly significant in drying and curing operations and in activities involving wet treatments. A
list of basic low to moderate cost energy saving techniques are provided below some of which have
been implemented by a few textile manufacturing units in Bangladesh leading to significant energy
savings.
Insulation of steam pipes
Retrofitting boilers
Recovery of waste heat from flu gas, steam
Insulation of pipes, valves, and flanges
Use of energy efficient motors
Replacement of old spinning and weaving machines
Use of servo motor based sewing machines
Use of air nozzles to save compressed air
Solid and liquid waste
Wastes specific to the textile industry include trials, selvedge, trimmings, cuttings of fabrics, and
yarns; spent dyes, pigments, and printing pastes; and sludge from process wastewater treatment
containing mainly fibers and grease. Solid and liquid wastes generated in textile industries should
be effectively recycled or reused within the process or external activities (e.g. waste fibers, cuttings,
and trimmings can be recycled as a feedstock for other operations, including low-grade products
non-woven, insulation etc.). Management and disposal of hazardous and non-hazardous wastes
should be in line with Environmental Conservation Act, 1995 (ECA) and Environmental
Conservation Rules, 1997 (ECR) that have provisions for environmentally sound use, storage,
transportation, import and export of hazardous and non-hazardous wastes or its components.

--- Page 57 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

55
2.2.
Health and Safety Issues:
Table- Common Structural, Fire & Electrical Safety Issues
Area
Issues commonly observed
Structural
Highly stressed columns, undocumented vertical extensions, localised areas of
high loads in buildings, discrepancy between structural drawing & built structure,
minor to major cracks in structural elements.
Fire
Inadequate, untested fire alarms, inadequate exit capacity compared to the
occupancy load, inadequate exit signs.
Electrical
Unsealed entry and exit points of cable, excessive dust deposit on cables, cables
laid on floor without guard, oil spill in generator room, inadequate earthing.
Table- Common Occupational Health Issues
Hazard
Description
Mitigation Measures
Chemical
Workers‘ exposure to fine particles such as
cotton dust leading to respiratory diseases
during fibre (cotton) preparation.
During finishing operations, VOC emitted
during printing or fabric cleaning process
leading to respiratory, heart diseases.
Residues of pesticides and chemicals are left
behind on the fabric leading to dermatitis.
Chromium is a major cause of allergic contact
dermatitis among workers who perform
dyeing operations and handle dyestuffs
containing chromium.
Organic dusts, including cotton dust, are
combustible and present a potential explosion
hazard.
 Installation of dust and VOC
extraction,
recycling
(e.g.
scrubbers)
 Use of well-ventilated rooms
 Use of vacuum cleaning of
surfaces instead of compressed air
sweeping techniques;
 Implementation
of
regular
housekeeping procedures
 Use of shift and task rotation
strategies for workers to minimize
VOC exposure
 Use of enclosed equipment
 Use
of
personal
protective
equipment (PPE)
Physical
Physical contact of workers with hot surfaces
or moving equipment such as spinning,
carding machines.
High noise in the spinning and weaving mills
during yarn and fabric production.
Exposure to extreme heat and humidity in the
sweatshops during wet processing and dry
finishing operations in WDF units from the
use of steam and hot fluids.
Exposure to X-rays in the area of monitoring
foam thickness during foam dyeing.
 Implementation
of
machine
guarding
and
lock-out-tag-out
systems and procedures
 Use
of
personal
hearing
protection
 Management of noise as per ECA
1995 and ECR 1997 (Rule 12,
Schedule-4)

2.3.
Community Health & Safety:
As discussed earlier, one of the major concerns for community health is the wastewater from the
WDF units that can potentially contaminate the surface and ground water. Odours from dyeing and
other finishing processes by oils, solvent vapours, formaldehyde, sulfur compounds, and ammonia

--- Page 58 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

56
can also impact community well-being. Measures to reduce toxicity in the wastewater, control
odorous emissions are discussed in earlier sections.
An additional community health and safety issue concerns the use of chemicals and their potential
risk to the health of consumers who purchase garments produced by the textile industry. Specific
consideration should be given to ensuring that these products are safe for human use. The
manufacturer should avoid using allergenic dyestuffs and dyestuffs that form carcinogenic
compounds. Adequate testing for pH, pesticides, heavy metals, formaldehyde, chlorinated phenols,
chloro-organic carriers, and biologically active finishes should be conducted to assess textile
characteristics according to the typical conditions of their use prior to entry into the markets.

2.4.
Social Issues
Area
Issues commonly observed in Bangladesh
Gender
Discrimination
Gender discrimination is an issue regarding recruitment, deciding on wages,
promotion and providing incentives to the women workforce. Trainings to
female workers on labour rights is another important aspect.
Working
Conditions
In addition to structural, fire & electrical safety issues, availability of in-house
health clinic and skilled nurses to attend the workers as well as sufficient toilet
facilities, supply of potable water at the workplace are inevitable for healthy
working condition.
Working Hours
Long working hour (e.g. beyond 12 hours/day, 7 days/week) is an issue due to
inadequacy of training to workers‘ on labour rights, record keeping by the
mill/factory owners on workers‘ daily working hours, payment of wages and
overtime.
Maternity Leave
Issues like not granting maternity leave for 6 months or granting maternity
leave without pay by the factory owners are still prevalent in the RMG sector.
Minimum
Wages
Bangladesh aims to increase the minimum wage of the textile sector as it is
still lower than that of most of the other peer countries where textile industry is
prominent.
Forced
and
Child Labour
Existence of bonded child labour, forced labour due to insufficient policy,
internal audit, record keeping on age proof by the mill/factory management.
Workers‘ Rights,
Collective
Bargaining
Restrictions on freedom of association, collective bargaining by the mill
management are apparent from the lack of documentation of trade unions‘
activities.
Workers‘ Skills
Employment of unskilled workers to meet the ever growing demand for
garment products often leads to repeat work, reducing productivity. Hence
there is a need for competency based, industrial training with proactive
participation from the mill/factory owners.
Projects in this sector should follow national regulations, and in their absence, good international
industry practices (GIIP), with respect to the following common social / worker issues:
 Working conditions and the management of worker relationships. For example, the
project should have established policies and procedures for human resources management;
working conditions and terms of employment; worker organizations and collective bargaining;
non-discrimination and equal opportunity; and managing retrenchment, and worker grievance
mechanisms.

--- Page 59 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

57
 Protecting the workforce: For example, the project should have established policies and
procedures to protect against child and forced labour.
 Occupational Health and Safety: For example, the project should provide for a safe and
healthy work environment, with consideration of inherent risks in the sector and specific classes
of hazards in the client‘s work areas, including physical, chemical, biological, and radiological
hazards.
 Workers engaged by third parties and supply chains. For example, the project should
ensure that contracted workers and workers of companies within their supply chain are managed
according to national regulations, or in their absence, GIIP.

3. Performance Indicators and Monitoring

3.1.
Wastewater discharge quality standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
Good International Industry
Practice (GIIP)
National Standards*
pH
6 - 9
6 - 9
BOD
mg/L
30
50 - 100
COD
mg/L
160
200 - 400
TSS
mg/L
50
150 - 200
Oil and Grease
mg/L
10
10
Cadmium
mg/L
0.02
0.05 – 0.5
Chromium (total)
mg/L
0.5
0.5 - 1
Chromium (hexavalent)
mg/L
0.1
0.1 - 1
Copper
mg/L
0.5
0.5 - 3
Nickel
mg/L
0.5
Zinc
mg/L
Phenol
mg/L
0.5
Sulfide
mg/L
1 - 2
Ammonia
mg/L
10
For irrigated land 15
* The National Standards are not specific to textile sector and is applicable for all the industrial units. The national
standards are defined as per the location of disposal – inland surface water; public sewer; irrigated land. For ease of
comparison, here the national standards are given as range and not as per the location of disposal.

3.2.
Ambient air quality standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National
Standards
Averaging period
Value
Suspended
Particulate Maters
µg/m3
1 year (PM10)
20
100 – 500
24 hour (PM10)
50
1 year (PM2.5)
10
24 hour (PM2.5)
25
Sulphur dioxide
µg/m3
24 hour
20
30 - 120

--- Page 60 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

58
10 minute
500
Oxides of Nitrogen µg/m3
1 year
40
30 - 100
1 hour
200
* The National Standards are not specific to textile sector and is applicable for all the industrial units. The national
standards are defined as per the categories of areal – industrial and mixed; commercial and mixed; residential and
rural; sensitive. For ease of comparison, here the national standards are given as range and not as per the location of
disposal.

3.3.
Resource and energy consumption standards
Process
Guideline Values
GIIP
National
Standards
Electrical
Energy
(kWh/kg)
Thermal
Energy
(MJ/kg)
Water
Consumption
(l / kg)
Wool Scouring
0.3
3.5
2-6
No national
standards
Yarn finishing
70-120
Yarn dyeing
0.8-1.1
13-16
15-30 (dyeing)
30-50 (rinsing)
Loose fiber dyeing
0.1-0.4
4-14
4-15 (dyeing)
4-20 (rinsing)
Knitted fabric finishing
1-6
10-60
70-120
Woven fabric finishing
0.5-1.5
30-70
50-100
Dyed woven fabric finishing
<200

3.4.
Waste generation standards
Outputs per unit of product
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Wastewater Wool Scouring
l/kg
2–6
No national
standards
Wastewater Yarn Finishing Wool
l/kg
35–45
Wastewater Yarn Finishing Cotton
l/kg
100–120
Wastewater Yarn Finishing Synthetic Fiber
l/kg
65–85
Wastewater Knitted Fabric Finishing Wool
l/kg
60–70
Wastewater Knitted Fabric Finishing Cotton
l/kg
60–135
Wastewater Knitted Fabric Finishing Synthetic
Fiber
l/kg
35–80
Wastewater Woven Fabric Finishing Wool
l/kg
70–140
Wastewater Woven Fabric Finishing Cotton
l/kg
50–70
Wastewater Woven Fabric Finishing + Print
Cotton
l/kg
150––80
Wastewater Woven Fabrics Finishing Synthetic
Fiber
l/kg
100-180
Sludge from Wastewater Treatment
kg/m3 treated
wastewater
1–5

--- Page 61 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

59
3.5.
Social standards
Areas
Unit
Values
National Standards
GIIP
Maternity leave
Month
6 months + benefits
6 months + benefits
Minimum age
Years
Below 14
Below 14 , for countries whose economy
and educational facilities are insufficiently
developed, otherwise below 15
Minimum wages
USD/
month
68
Vietnam-128, China-266, Cambodia- 100,
Indonesia-199, India-176, Thailand-237,
Srilanka-69, Pakistan-95
Working Hour
Hours/
week
48
Vietnam-48, China-40, Cambodia- 48,
Indonesia-40,
India-40,
Thailand-48,
Srilanka-45.5, Pakistan-48
Overtime limit
Hours/
year
416
Vietnam-200, China-432, Cambodia- 540,
Indonesia-728, India-No limit, Thailand-
1872, Srilanka-624, Pakistan-No limit
Annual leave
Days
17
Vietnam-12, China-5, Cambodia- 18,
Indonesia-12,
India-16,
Thailand-6,
Srilanka-14, Pakistan-14
Trade
Union/Collective
bargaining
The provisions related
to registration of trade
unions are simplified
under
the
amended
labour act in 2013 but
the revised act has still
no
provisions
on
Freedom
of
Association
and
Collective Bargaining
The way in which collective bargaining
are given legal force varies considerably
across
different
industrial
relations
systems. Globally, the best practice is to
give collective bargaining a status similar
to that of administrative law. The global
buyers through their code of conduct
include aspect on freedom of association
and collective bargaining as one of the
core issues.


4. General Description of Industry Activities

Sector Activity
Sub-sector Activities
Yarn Production
Mostly cotton is used as the raw material/fibre in Bangladesh for yarn
production. However, the country does not have its own production of cotton.
It imports 70% of the cotton from central Asia. EHS issues around cotton
production are beyond the scope of this guideline unless these are captured
under buyer requirements such as Better Cotton Initiative and other Supply
chain certification requirements. Before the fibre can be spun into yarn, a
series of preparation phases, including ginning, opening, blending, scouring,
carding, combing, and drafting are undertaken. Once the fibre is ready, it is
spun in the spinning mills to produce yarn through a series of grouping,
twisting and spinning operations.
Fabric Production The most important methods for fabric manufacture are weaving and knitting.

--- Page 62 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

60
Weaving is done using looms. There are many kinds of looms including
shuttle, projectile, rapier, and fluid jet. Knitting is a method of converting yarn
into fabric by intermeshing loops, which are formed with the help of needles.
In Bangladesh there are both weaving and knitting mills.
WDF
Washing involves cleaning textiles or apparel with water and chemicals;
dyeing involves colouring or printing substrates; finishing involves the
superficial treatment of textiles or apparel at the wet or dry stage. WDF is
more popularly known in Bangladesh as dyeing, printing, and finishing. These
are the final steps in the textile industry. Here textile materials undergo both
mechanical and chemical treatment. Perfection in WDF operation determines
the appearance and use of the fabric and thus its marketability.
RMG
This involves cutting and sewing of garments ready for export.
Polymer
Synthesis
and
Natural
Raw
Material
Production
In the polymer production process, reactants are purified and then
polymerised. Once the polymer is ready after polymerization, it is separated
from the reaction mass through a series of separation and drying steps.
Finally, the polymer is extruded and pelletized for packaging and shipment.
The major natural raw material for textile sector is cotton. The cotton is used
for yarn production and further details are discussed under the ―Yarn
Production‖ sector activity.

--- Page 63 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

61
18.2. ESRM Guidance Note for Tanning and Leather Finishing Sector

1. Introduction
The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM for the Tanning and Leather finishing Sector is to
provide a high level indicative summary of potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and
performance levels for transactions in the Tanning and Leather finishing sector in Bangladesh. The
scope of application will be fully aligned with the Section 4 of Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and
FIs. At all times, applicable national regulations are to be followed. Where national regulations
differ from the levels and measures presented in this Guidance Note, loan proposals are expected to
achieve whichever is more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those provided in this
Guidance Note are appropriate, in view of specific loan proposal, a full and detailed justification for
any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This
justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of
human health and the environment. For the purpose of this Guidance Note, the leather& tannery
industry consists of two main sub-sectors namely: 1) Tanning; 2) Leather finishing operations. The
primary activities considered in the above sub-sectors of Tanning and leather finishing sector
activities include but are not limited to:
 Hide and Skin Pre-storage/Storage, and Beam house Operations: Sorting and Trimming,
Curing and Storing, Soaking, Dehairing and Liming of Bovine Hides, Painting and Liming
of Sheepskins, Fleshing
 Tanyard operations: Deliming, Bating, Degreasing, Pickling, Wet-White Pretanning,
Tanning, Draining, Samming, and Setting, Splitting, Shaving
 Post-Tanning Operations: Neutralization, Bleaching, Retanning, Dyeing, Fatliquoring,
Drying
 Finishing Operations: Mechanical Finishing Processes, Surface Coat Application

2. Industry Specific Impacts and Management
2.1.
Environmental Issues:
The major environmental concerns related to the Tanning and Leather Finishing sector in
Bangladesh include the following:
 Wastewater
Industrial effluent generated during tanning operations is a major pollutant. The wastewater effluent
typically contains both solid and liquid matter. The solid wastes are mainly generated in the initial
and final stages of tannery operations whereas the liquid waste is mainly produced during the
tanning and dying of leather. The effluent may contain dissolved lime, Hydrogen Sulfide,
Ammonium or Calcium salts, acids, Chromium dyes, oils, organic matter and dissolved solids.

Table- Process wastewater and mitigation measures as sub-sectoral activities
Sector
Activities
Industrial process
wastewater
Mitigation Measures
Pre-
tanning
(e.g.,
Wastewater from pre-tanning
and beam house processes
may contain dirt, dung and
Screen wastewater to remove large solids
Use an enzymatic dehairing process and recover
hair for resale, reducing Chemical Oxygen

--- Page 64 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

62
sorting,
trimming,
curing) and
beam
house
operations
(e.g.,
soaking,
dehairing,
liming, and
fleshing)
blood washed from the hides
and skins and discharged in
the soak liquor, resulting in
high levels of suspended and
dissolved solids and organic
matter
Process-specific
substances,
such as salt, biocides and
pesticides can be found in the
combined
wastewater
effluents from these activities;
Salted and brined hides can
produce
leachate
contaminated
with
dirt,
bacteria, blood, salt, etc.
Effluent (e.g., soak liquor)
contains proteins including
albumin and proteolytic and
other bacteria.
Inorganic sulfides (NaHS or
Na2S) and lime treatment are
used in the dehairing process,
which may result in sulfide-
containing
liquors
in
the
wastewater effluent. Although
a total substitution of sulfides
used in this process is not
practical, especially for bovine
hides


Demand (COD) by up to 40–50 percent)
For conventional lime dehairing processes, use
sulfide and lime in a 20–50 percent overall
solution
Maintain sulfide-containing wastewater at an
alkaline pH (>10) level. The conventional
treatment is lime and sulphide wastewater
oxidation (catalytic oxidation tanks, or aeration
tanks). Care should be taken to avoid an
accidental pH value–dependent (pH<7) release of
hydrogen sulfide (H2S), arising from, for
example, inappropriate mixing of alkaline
Avoid the use of banned chlorinated / halogenated
phenols,
as
well
as
banned,
and
less
biodegradable,
biocides
containing
arsenic,
mercury, and chlorinated substances
Monitor use of biocide by keeping an inventory of
biocide inputs and outputs.
If conventional lime dehairing process is used,
filter
wastewater
to
recover
hair
before
dissolution. This may reduce COD by 15–20
percent and total nitrogen by 25–30 percent in
mixed tannery effluent;
Recycle liming float which may reduce COD by
30–40 percent; nitrogen by up to 35 percent,
sulfide use by up to 40 percent, and lime use by up
to 50 percent
Use easily degraded ethoxylated fatty alcohols,
instead of ethoxylated alkylphenols, as surfactants
in degreasing
Use carbon dioxide (CO2) deliming (e.g. for light
bovine hides of less than 3 mm thickness). For
thicker hides, the process requires an increase in
the float temperature (up to 35°C), and / or
process duration, and / or the addition of small
amounts of deliming auxiliaries.
Use of natural drying of small skins at facilities in
suitable warm, dry climates
Use of chilling for short-term preservation of
freshly processed hides or skins, and / or use of
antiseptics to increase storage time
Undertake trimming and, where possible, pre-

--- Page 65 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

63
fleshing before curing or other pretanning
operations
Use of mechanical or manual removal of salt from
hides and skins before soaking
Installation of salt-free pickling systems, and use
of non-swelling polymeric sulphonic acids (this
may affect leather characteristics);
Tanyard
operations
(deliming,
bating,
degreasing,
pickling,
tanning)
Significant nitrogen loads and
resulting
discharge
of
ammonia
nitrogen
are
typically
associated
with
tanning processes. The use of
ammonium salts in the process
is a main source of ammonia
nitrogen in tannery effluents
(up to 40 percent)
Degreasing process may result
in discharge of residual fat that
retains a considerable amount
of the chlorinated solvent
Wastewater from deliming and
bating processes may contain
Sulfides,
chlorides,
ammonium
salts
(TKN,
Ammonia
Nitrogen)
and
calcium salts.
Trivalent chromium salts (Cr
III) are among the most
commonly
used
tanning
agents, accounting for the
majority (approximately 75
percent) of the chromium in
the wastewater stream
Installation of salt-free pickling systems, and use
of non-swelling polymeric sulphonic acids
Use of short (e.g. low-water content) floats in the
tanning cycle (e.g. floats using from 20 - 40%
water w.r.t. normal floats), which allow for water
savings of up to 70 percent and facilitate chrome
fixation
Consider using alternative tanning agents in place
of, or in addition to, chromium, considering the
toxicity and persistence of the alternative agents
as well as the use and desired characteristics of the
leather product.
Avoid the use of chromium (VI), by limiting the
type of chromium employed to chromium (III)
Recycle chrome tanning floats. This may reduce
chromium use up to 20 percent in a conventional
tannery process and up to 50 percent in wool-on
sheepskins. Liquor containing excess chromium
may be precipitated, acidified and then recycled.
Reduce chromium concentration in the waste float
by using high-exhaustion chromium salts and
alkaline products and or increasing the float
temperature;
Avoid the use of Chromium because it can adsorb
onto the surface of organic particles of varying
sizes and may not precipitate out of solution. Care
must be taken that these
Recycle supernatant from chrome recovery to
enhance chrome savings
Post-
Tanning
Operations
The
main
wastewater
contaminants depend on the
tanning techniques used. Post-
tanning operations involve use
of several classes of chemicals
including fat liquoring agents,
chlorinated
organic
Avoid the use of halogenated compounds (e.g. in
fatliquors)
Recover impregnating agents from effluents
Avoid the use of sequestering and wetting agents
with low biodegradability compounds (e.g.
ethylen-diamintetraacetate)
Avoid the use of Di-carboxylic acids for the

--- Page 66 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

64
compounds,
impregnating
agents, sequestering agents,
masking agents and dyes.
precipitation of chromium during pre-treatment of
effluent;
Finishing
Operations
Finishing wastewaters may
contain
lacquer
polymers,
solvents, color pigments and
coagulants.
Substitute organic solvent based dyes with
nonhalogenated and solvent / water-based and
water-soluble dyes for dyeing and finishing
operations
 Air Emissions
Tanning and leather finishing activities generate air emissions, including releases of organic
solvents (VOCs), sulfides from the beam house and wastewater treatment, ammonia from the beam
house, tanning, and post-tanning operations, dust/total particulate matter from various process
operation and odours. The control techniques used for the several of emissions sources are as
discussed below:
Organic solvents are used in degreasing and finishing processes. Controls methods include -
water-based formulations (containing low quantities of solvent) for spray dyeing; Implement
organic solvent-saving finishing techniques such as roller coating or curtain coating machines
where applicable (e.g, application of heavy finish layers), and otherwise use spraying units with
economizers and high volume / low-pressure spray guns; Prohibit the use of internationally banned
solvents; Control VOC emissions through the application of secondary control techniques.
Sulfides are used in the dehairing process. Hydrogen sulphide (H2S) may be released when
sulfide-containing liquors are acidified and during normal operational activities. H2S is an irritant
and asphyxiant.
Prevention and control measures for sulfide emissions include:
 Maintain a basic pH over 10 in facility equalizing tanks and sulfide oxidation tanks
 Prevent anaerobic conditions in sulfate-containing liquors and sludge
 Add manganese sulfate to treated effluent, as needed, to facilitate the oxidation of sulfides
 Where H2S formation may occur, use adequate ventilation to capture the emissions,
followed by treatment with wet scrubbers or bio-filters (particularly for wastewater treatment
units).
Ammonia emissions may be generated from some of the wet processing steps (e.g. deliming
and dehairing, or during drying if it is used to aid dye penetration in the coloring process).
Prevention and control of ammonia emissions may be achieved through use of adequate ventilation,
followed by wet scrubbing with an acidic solution.
Dust/total particulate may be generated from various operations (e.g. storage and handling of
powdery chemicals, dry shaving, buffing, dust removal machines, milling drums, and staking). Dust
emissions should be controlled through use of a centralized system, employing cyclones, scrubbers,
and/or bag filters, as needed.
Odours may result from raw hides and skins, putrefaction, and from substances including sulfides,
mercaptans, and organic solvents. Prevention and control measures for odour emissions include the
following:
 Promptly cure raw hides
 Reduce the time that sludge remains in the thickener, dewater thickened sludge by
centrifugation or filter press and dry the resulting filter cake. Sludge containing less than 30
percent solids may generate especially strong odours

--- Page 67 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

65
 Ventilate tannery areas and control exhaust from odorous areas (e.g. where wastewater
sludge is thickened and dewatered), through use of a bio-filter and / or a wet scrubber with acid,
alkali, or oxidant.
 Solid waste
Solid waste includes salt from raw skin / hide dusting; raw skin / hide trimmings; organic matter
such as hair from the liming/dehairing process, which may contain lime and sulphides, and fleshing
from raw skins/hides; wet-blue shavings, which contains chromium oxide; wet-blue trimming,
which is generated from finishing processes and contains chromium oxide, syntans, and dye; and
buffing dust, which also contains chromium oxide, syntans, and dye & tannery sludge. Organic
matter is oxidised by bacteria and this can deplete oxygen levels in the water killing fish and other
biodiversity.
Some good practices in managing risks emanating from solid wastes in a tannery include:
 Develop and implement a waste management plan covering all aspects of waste treatment
on site. Wherever possible, priority should be given to reduction of wastes generated, and
recovery and re-use of raw materials.
 Proper segregation of different waste/residue fractions to facilitate recovery and re-use (e.g.,
to manufacture pet toys, pet food, leather fibreboard)
 Reduce inputs of process agents (particularly precipitation agents in wastewater treatment)
to the extent practical
 Proper segregation of different waste/residue fractions to facilitate recovery and re-use (e.g.,
to manufacture pet toys, pet food, leather fibreboard)
 Treat waste on site for example by dewatering (thickening) of sludges, compacting,
rendering (drying and grinding to make bone meal), anaerobic digestion, composting, thermal
treatment and proper disposal of chrome containing sludge to a treatment facility.
 Hazardous materials
The level of knowledge about proper storage and handling of particularly hazardous chemicals is
very low within tannery workers. Measuring and mixing of chemicals is done manually in the
small-scale tanneries. Process control is generally absent. Direct contact with chemicals such as
chromium, residual chemicals can lead to dermatitis and other diseases, chrome ulceration may
occur in chrome tanning, especially on the hands. Tanneries may use a range of flammable
materials. There may be large quantities of solvent vapours within the production areas, which can
explode if ignited. Explosions or fires can result in widespread contamination and destruction,
impacting not only the immediate site but surrounding land, rivers and communities. Good
practices in managing risks emanating from handling and storage of hazardous materials include the
following:
 Consider feasibility of substitution of hazardous chemicals with less hazardous alternatives.
 Proper storage of chemicals in a dedicated, enclosed and secure facility with a roof and a
paved/concrete floor
 Chemical tanks should be completely contained within secondary containment such as
bunds
 Chemicals with different hazard symbols should not be stored together - clear guidance on
the compatibility of different chemicals can be obtained from the Materials Safety Data Sheet
(MSDS) which should be readily available from the manufacturer and on site.
 Inspect tanks routinely to prevent overfilling or filling with incompatible materials.

--- Page 68 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

66
 Avoid potential sources of ignition including banning smoking in and around facilities.
 Provide the local fire department with a list/ volume of products stored on the premises.
 Emergency storage lagoons may be needed to prevent contaminated firewater reaching
watercourses
 Introduce accident, fire and explosion precautions and emergency response plans and
involve the emergency services and neighbouring community in the creation and practice of
these plans to respond to major incidents at the installation.
 Energy consumption
Tanneries consume energy during mechanical operations and during the day to day running of the
buildings. Typical energy consumption is for mechanical operations of dehairing, rotating drums,
spray machines, drying and refrigeration etc. There is need to improve thermal efficiency of heating
equipment to minimise heat loss.

Table- Consumption of thermal and electrical energy
Energy input
Use
% overall consumption
Thermal energy

Drying
Hot water
Space heating
32 – 34
32 – 34
17 – 20
Electrical energy
Machinery and process vessels
Compressed air
Light
9 – 12
1.5 – 3
1.5 – 3
Good practices in managing risks emanating from thermal energy consumption include:
 Low temperature drying (LTD) machines are available with reduced energy consumption,
although in some cases they can lengthen the drying process (e.g. LTD drying tunnels may
require all night to dry leathers, compared with 4 hours in conventional hang drying tunnels, but
may have three times the capacity).
 Considerable reductions in energy consumption can be achieved by optimising the
mechanical dewatering processes prior to drying.
 Keeping drying temperature low and drying time and amount of exhaust air at the necessary
minimum will keep heat losses to a minimum.
 Implement heat recovery processes such as energy savings can be achieved by heat pumps
incorporating recovery systems. Waste heat can be used from and for other processes. By means
of heat exchangers, energy can be recovered from the waste process water, from condensate
from vacuum dryers, from evaporated water from high frequency drying, or from exhaust air
from drying.
Good practices in managing risks emanating from electrical energy consumption include:
 Mechanical finishing operations create noise, and consume energy. Dust extraction systems
contribute to both of these parameters. Recycling of the cleaned air might save energy for
workplace heating.
 Monitor and target energy usage and implement behavioural change programmes.

--- Page 69 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

67
2.2.
Health and Safety Issues:

Table - Common Structural, Fire & Electrical Safety Issues in Bangladesh
Area
Issues commonly observed
Prevention and Mitigation Measures
Structural Highly
stressed
columns;
undocumented
vertical
extensions; localised areas of
high
loads
in
buildings;
discrepancy
between
structural drawing and built
structure; minor to major
cracks in structural elements.
Compliance
to
regulatory
requirements
including the Bangladesh National Building Code
(BNBC) (2015) or international codes, such as those
compiled by the International Code Council (ICC),
(2006).
Undertake periodic structural safety audits
by accredited agencies.
Fire
Inadequate,
untested
fire
alarms;
inadequate
exit
capacity compared to the
occupancy load; lack of exit
signage.
Compliance with the by-laws of the Fire
Regulation (2014), part of the Bangladesh Labor
(Amendment)
Act
(2013),
which
includes
requirements regarding the formation of a safety
committees, and other measures such as emergency
exits, access to stairs, and provision of personal
protective equipment (PPE).
Provisions for fire hydrants as per the
requirements of BNBC (2015) and by Fire
Regulation
2014,
including
water
supply
specifications according to the building size/hazard.
Undertake regular fire audits by accredited
agencies, with mock drills to be conducted on a
periodic basis as per the fire hazard assessment of
the facility.
Electrical Unsealed entry and exit points
for electrical cable; excessive
dust deposit on cables; cables
laid on floor without guarding
/ protection; oil leaks in
generator room; inadequate
cable grounding.
Undertake electrical safety assessment on a
periodic basis, and ensure workers are trained and
provided with appropriate PPE based on the risk
assessment.
Table - Common Occupational Health Issues
Hazard
Description
Mitigation Measures
Exposure to
chemicals
Tannery workers may be exposed
to
chemical
hazards
during
loading, unloading, handling, and
mixing of chemicals; during the
washing,
and
disposing
of
chemical containers; and during
the management and disposal of
chemical waste and effluent.
 Consider feasibility of substitution
of hazardous chemicals with less
hazardous alternatives.
 Chemicals that will react should be
segregated. Specifically, acids should
be stored away from sodium sulfide,
and alkalis away from ammonium salts,
to prevent accidental mixing and
release of dangerous gases (e.g. H2S,

--- Page 70 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

68
NH3)
 Small containers (e.g. dyes and
fatliquors samples) should be safely
stored on racks and shelves. Heavier
chemical containers (particularly those
containing liquid chemicals, such as
acids) should be stored on wooden or
plastic pallets at the floor level
 Use
of
personal
protection
equipment (e.g. gloves, glasses, boots,
aprons, masks, hoods, respirators),
particularly in the wet activity areas of
the tannery. Respirators / masks with
particulate filters and glasses should be
used when handling powder and liquid
chemicals. Inspect tanks routinely to
prevent overfilling or filling with
incompatible materials.
 Use equipment and techniques (e.g.
roller coating) to minimize indoor air
pollution (e.g. during spraying and
general
application
of
finishing
treatments);
 Use air extraction systems and
ventilation in areas / machines for dry
shaving, buffing, dedusting, spraying,
and weighing.
Exposure to
biological agents
Workers may be exposed to
disease-agents such as bacteria,
fungi, mites and parasites which
may be present in the hides or
may
form
during
the
manufacturing process.
 Provide
personal
protective
equipment to reduce contact
 with
materials
potentially
containing pathogens
 Ensure
hides
move
between
processes quickly in order to prevent
the growth of bacteria. For example,
delimed skins are no longer protected
from bacterial growth by an alkaline
environment and should be moved to
degreasing and pickling stages as
rapidly as possible.
Other
physical
injuries
Injuries from slips, trips and fall.
These are primarily caused by
uneven surfaces, inappropriate
footwear, poor lighting, weather
conditions, trailing cables and
 To ensure that walkways are
constructed of non-slip materials and
route cables and pipework under
walkways.
 Control the effect of fires and

--- Page 71 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

69
pipe
work,
especially
during
unblocking,
maintenance
and
cleaning activities.
Tanneries may use a range of
flammable materials. There may
be large quantities of solvent
vapours within the production
areas, which can explode if
ignited. Explosions or fires can
result
in
widespread
contamination and destruction.
explosions by segregating process,
storage, utility and safe areas.




2.3.
Community Health & Safety:

Table - Community health & safety impacts and mitigation measures
Risk of road
accidents during
transportation of
materials

Traffic safety:
 Road safety measures like emphasizing safety aspects among drivers,
improving driving skills and requiring licensing of drivers, adopting limits
for trip duration and arranging driver rosters to avoid overtiredness, use of
speed control devices (governors) on trucks and remote monitoring of
driver actions
Transportation of hazardous materials:
 To ensure compliance with local laws and international requirements
applicable to the transport of hazardous materials (Hazmats)
 Standard operating procedures for transportation of Hazmats - proper
labelling of containers, shipping manifest, ensuring adequate transport
vehicle specifications, , use of labelling and placarding (external signs on
transport vehicles)
 Training of employees in shipping procedures and emergency procedures
Respiratory
problems arising
out of exposure to
dust and other
gaseous emissions

 Inclusion of buffer strips or other methods of physical separation around
project sites to protect the public from major hazards associated with
hazardous materials incidents or process failure
 Modifying process or storage conditions to reduce the potential
consequences of an accidental off-site release. Provisions to alert the public,
provide for evacuation of surrounding areas, establish safety zones around a
site, and ensure the provision of emergency medical services to the public
 Improving shut-down and secondary containment to reduce the amount
of material escaping from containment and to reduce the release duration
 Reducing the probability that releases will occur through improved site
operations and control and through improvements in maintenance and
inspection
Risk of fire and
structural damage

 Fire prevention measures such as fuel load & control of combustibles,
ignition sources, interior finish flame spread characteristics, interior finish
smoke production characteristics, human acts, and housekeeping and

--- Page 72 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

70
maintenance
 Fire suppression system – fire hydrants
 Emergency response plan to assist staff and emergency response teams
during real life emergency and training exercises
Noise pollution

 Noise monitoring may be carried out for the purposes of establishing the
existing ambient noise
 Limiting the hours of operation for specific pieces of equipment or
operations, especially mobile sources operating through community areas
 Improving the acoustic performance of constructed
 Installing vibration isolation for mechanical equipment
 Re-locating noise sources to less sensitive areas to take advantage of
distance and shielding buildings, apply sound insulation

2.4.
Social Issues
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘

3. Performance Indicators and Monitoring

3.1.
Wastewater discharge quality standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
pH
S.U.
6 – 9
6 – 9
(across all discharge locations i.e. inland
surface water, public sewer and irrigated land)
BOD5
mg/L
50
50 - 100
COD
mg/L
250
200 - 400
Total Suspended Solids
mg/L
50
150 (inland surface water), 200 (irrigated land)
500 (public sewer
Sulfide
mg/L
1.0
1-2
Chromium (hexavalent)
mg/L
0.1
0.5 - 1
Chromium (total)
mg/L
0.5
0.1 – 1
Chloride
mg/L
1000
600
Sulfate
mg/L
300
400
Ammonia
mg/L
10
Oil & grease
mg/L
10
10
Total nitrogen
mg/L
10
50-75
Total phosphorus
mg/L
8-15
Phenols
mg/L
0.5
Total coliform bacteria
MPN/100 ml
400
No national standard
Temperature increase
oC
No national standard
* The National Standards are not specific to Leather and tannery sector and is applicable for all the industrial units.
The national standards are defined as per the location of disposal – inland surface water; public sewer; irrigated land.
For ease of comparison, here the national standards are given as range and not as per the location of disposal. In
addition to the above mentioned pollutants, there are other pollutants as well for which standards are specified.

--- Page 73 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

71
3.2.
Air emission levels for leather finishing
Category

Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Upholstery Leather
(= 4 gram add-on/square feet)
kg of HAP loss per
100 sq. meters of
leather processed

1.3/0.2
No national standard
Upholstery Leather
(<4 gram add-on/square feet)
3.3/1.2
Water-resistant/Specialty Leather
2.7/2.4
Non-water-resistant
Leather
1.8/1.1

3.3.
Effluent load from tannery processes based on GIIP
Values per
tonne of
rawhide
Water
(m³/t)
COD
(kg/t)
BOD5
(kg/t)
SS
(kg/t)
Cr(III)
(kg/t)
Sulfides
(kg/t)
TK
(kg/
Chlori
des
(kg/t)
SO4
(kg/t)
Oil/Gr
ease
(kg/t)
TDS
(kg/t)
Bovine
Salted Raw
Hide
Process
12–37
145–
230
48–86
85–155
3–7
2–9
10–
17
145–
220
45–
110
9–18
300–
520
Pig Skins
32–69
140–
320
52–1
15
70–135
3–6
3–7
12–
20
80–240
40–
100
34–71
180–
500
Sheepskins
(wet-salted)
110–
295
330–
1005
135–
397
175–
352
9–15
6–20
21–
44
210–
640
45–
110
40–
150
Wool-on
Sheepskins
275-
410
780-
1500
220-
1300
195
20
21
910
40-
150
1520

3.4.
Dry Sludge Generation from Tannery Wastewater Treatment based on GIIP
Parameter
Sludge Production
(kg DS/tonne rawhide)
Sludge (total)
400-500
Primary Treatment
Mixing + Sedimentation
80
Mixing + Chemical treatment + Sedimentation
150-200
Mixing + Chemical treatment + Flotation
150-200
Biological treatment
Primary or chemical + Extended aeration
70–150
Primary or chemical + Extended aeration with nitrification and
denitrification
130–150
Primary or chemical + Aerated facultative lagoons
100–140
Anaerobic treatment (lagoon or UASB)
60–100
Membrane biological reactor (MBR)

--- Page 74 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

72
3.5.
Resource and energy consumption standards
Inputs per unit of product
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Energy/ Fuel: Energy consumption per unit of
production bovine salted hides, conventional chrome-
tanning)
GJ/tonn
9.3–42
No national
standard
Materials: Chemical consumption (bovine salted
hides, conventional chrome-tanning)
kg/tonn
Approx
. 500
No national
standards

3.6.
Waste generation standards
Outputs per unit of product
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Solid Waste: (Hazardous / Non-Hazardous)(bovine
salted hides, conventionalchrome-tanning)
Kg/t
450-730
No national
standards
Air Emission: (organic solvents)(bovine salted hides,
conventionalchrome-tanning)
Kg/t
Approx.
40

3.7.
Social standards
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘.

4. General Description of Industry Activities
Sector Activity
Sub-sector Activities
Leather tannery
1) Beam house operations: Raw hides and skins are typically procured
from the hide and skin markets or directly from the abattoirs (slaughter
houses) and delivered to the tanneries or fellmongeries (a fellmongery is
a tannery that processes sheep skins). The various activities in beamhouse
operations includes:
 Curing: Long-term preservation method (up to six months) includes
salting, brining, drying, or dry salting. Short-term preservation
(typically two to five days) involves cooling, using crushed ice or
refrigerated storage, and biocides. Hides and skins are generally
stored on pallets in ventilated or air conditioned areas.
 Soaking: This allows hides and skins to reabsorb any lost water, clean
them, and remove interfibrillary material. Soaking can range from
several hours to a few days. Additives to soaking water include
surfactants, enzyme preparations, bactericides, and alkali products.
 Unhairing and liming: Mechanical and chemical treatments remove
hair, epidermis, some interfibrillary components, and open up the
fibre structure. Elimination of keratinous material (e.g. hair, hair
roots, epidermis) and fats from the pelts involves the use of sulphides
and lime treatments. To remove the wool from sheepskins, ‗paint‘
(containing lime and sodium suphide) is applied to the skin and left to
dissolve the cells around the hair root, allowing hair or wool to be

--- Page 75 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

73
removed by mechanical or manual pulling.
 Fleshing: This is a mechanical process to scrape off the excess
organic material from the hide (e.g. connective tissue and fat).
 Deliming: This removes residual lime (or other alkali) from the pelts
by gradually lowering pH through washing and addition of deliming
chemicals (e.g. ammonium sulphate, among others), increasing
temperature, and removing residual chemicals and degraded skin
components.
 Bating: Enzymes are used to remove undesirable hair roots and
pigments from the leather. This can improve the grain of the hide and
the subsequent run and stretch of the leather.
 Degreasing: This is the elimination of excess grease from fatty skins.
Three different methods commonly used for degreasing are
degreasing in aqueous medium with non-ionic surfactant, degreasing
in aqueous medium with organic solvents and non-ionic surfactants,
and degreasing in an organic solvent medium.
2) Tanyard: Leather is called ‗pickled‘ leather up until the end of the
tanyard processes, where it becomes ‗wet blue‘ leather.
 Pickling: This is conducted to lower the pH of the pelt before tanning.
Depending on the type of tanning, the pickling floats will have a
different composition; this normally includes sulphuric acid and
common salt.
 Tanning: This leads to the stabilization of the collagen fibre through
cross-linking by tanning agents; after this, hides are no longer subject
to putrefaction. Tanning agents can be categorized in three main
groups namely mineral (chrome); vegetable; and alternatives (e.g.
syntans, aldehydes, and oil tannage). Different tanning agents are
used depending on the properties required in the finished leather.
 Draining, horsing, samming, and setting: After tanning, leathers are
drained, rinsed, and either horsed up (hung on a ‗horse‘) to ‗age‘ or
unloaded into boxes and subsequently sammed (squeezed between
rollers) to reduce the moisture content. Setting-out operations stretch
the leather.
 Splitting and Shaving: Splitting cuts leather to a set thickness.
Shaving is carried out when splitting is not possible or when minor
adjustments to the thickness are required.
3) Post-tanning: These processes are mostly undertaken in a single
processing vessel. Specialized operations may also be performed to add
certain properties to the leather product (e.g. water resistance or flame
retardation). A wide variety of processes and chemicals may be used in
this phase. For example, the re-tannage of leather, vegetable tanning
extracts, syntans, aldehydes, resins, and mineral tanning agents might be
used. Weak alkalis (e.g. sodium or ammonium bicarbonate, formiate, or
acetate) are used in the neutralization process. Before leather is tradable

--- Page 76 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

74
and storable as an intermediate product (referred to as ‗crust‘) it
undergoes a drying process. Drying techniques include samming, setting,
centrifuging, hang drying and vacuum drying, amongst others.
4) Finishing: Finishing operations enhance the appearance of the leather
and provide the performance characteristics (e.g. colour, water
resistance). These operations can be divided into mechanical finishing
processes and surface coat applications. A wide range of processes exist
for both types of finishing, including, but not limited to polishing, staking
(softening and stretching of leather), plating (flattening) and spray coating
(spraying the finishing material with pressurized air in spray cabinets).

--- Page 77 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

75
18.3. ESRM Guidance Note for Cement Manufacturing Sector

1. Introduction
The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM for the Cement Manufacturing Sector is to provide a
high level indicative summary of potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and performance
levels for transactions in the Cement Manufacturing sector in Bangladesh. The scope of application
will be fully aligned with the Section 4 of Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and FIs. At all times,
applicable national regulations are to be followed. Where national regulations differ from the levels
and measures presented in this Guidance Note, loan proposals are expected to achieve whichever is
more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those provided in this Guidance Note are
appropriate, in view of specific loan proposal, a full and detailed justification for any proposed
alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This justification should
demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of human health and
the environment.

2. Industry Specific Impacts and Management

2.1.
Environmental Issues:
The major environmental concerns related to the cement sector in Bangladesh include the
following:
 Air emissions
Air emissions are generated by the handling and storage of materials, and by the operation of kiln
systems, clinker coolers, and mills. Dust emissions are a primary environmental concern in cement
manufacturing. The main sources of dust emissions are the raw material preparation process (raw
mills), fuel preparation and storage, the clinker burning process (kilns and clinker coolers), and
cement grinding and drying units (cement mills). These sources of dust emissions are known as
process dust or point sources which are emitted through stacks at various sections of the production
line. Dust emissions can also arise during the storage and handling of materials and solid fuels, e.g.,
from open storage piles, conveyors of raw materials, etc. These are known as fugitive sources of
dust emissions. While fugitive dust emissions generally have a more direct impact within the
facility and the immediate surrounding area, process dust emissions from point sources can have an
impact on the air quality of a larger area, including nearby communities. The point and fugitive
sources for dust emissions are listed in following Table along with the control techniques to
mitigate emissions.
Table- Particulate Matter (Dust) Emission Sources and Control Techniques
Particulate Matter (Dust) EmissionsSources and Control Techniques
Particulate Matter (Dust) Point Source Emissions: For particulate matter emissions associated
with the operation of kiln systems, clinker coolers, and mills, including clinker and limestone
burning, pollution prevention and control techniques, in addition to proper smoothing (i.e.,
maintaining the kiln in consistently optimum operating conditions) of kiln operations, include:
Capturing kiln and clinker cooler dusts using fabric (baghouse) filters and recycling the recovered
particulates into the kiln feed and into the clinker, respectively;
 Using fabric (baghouse) filter systems as the preferred option, or electrostatic precipitators
(ESPs), as an alternative option, to collect and control fine particulate (PM10 and PM2.5

--- Page 78 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

76
emissions) in kiln exhaust gas and bypass gas dust, and exhaust air from coolers;
 Capturing mill dust by fabric (baghouse) filters and recycling within the mill.
Particulate Matter (Dust) Fugitive Emission Sources: Fugitive sources of PM emissions are
mainly associated with intermediate and final materials handling and storage (including crushing
and grinding of raw materials); handling and storage of solid fuels; transportation of materials
(e.g. by trucks or conveyor belts), and bagging activities. Measures to control fugitive emissions
include:
 Use of enclosed systems for handling material (for example, crushing operations, raw milling,
and clinker grinding) maintained under negative pressure by exhaust fans with dedusting of
ventilation air using fabric (baghouse) filters; Use of enclosed belt conveyors for materials
transportation and emission controls at transfer points, including systems for cleaning return
belts;
 Design sufficiently large covered storage for clinker and solid fuels to avoid the need for
frequent double handling to and from outside stock piles;
 Use of automatic bag-filling / handling systems to extent possible, with fugitive emission
control;
 Storage practices to reduce diffuse dust from material and fuel stocks include: covered or
closed bays for crushed and preblended raw materials; silos for conventional fuels such as
pulverized coal and petroleum coke (petcoke); areas protected from wind and precipitation for
waste-derived fuels; covered/closed bays or silos for clinker with automatic dust
extraction/reclamation; silos with automatic dust extraction/reclamation for cements connected
to automated loading system for bulk tankers.
 PM emissions in storage/stockpile areas may also be reduced through the application of water
spray and chemical dust suppressors, including humidification techniques, at material
charging/discharging points;
 Implementation of routine plant maintenance and good housekeeping to keep small air leaks
and spills to a minimum, and use of mobile and stationary vacuum systems for routine
operations and upsets;
 Use of simple, linear layouts for materials-handling operations to reduce the need for multiple
transfer points, including paving and wetting routines for road transport areas.

Table- Other Air Emissions and Control Techniques
Other Air Emissions and Control Techniques
Nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions are generated in the high temperature combustion process of the
cement kiln. Primary techniques for the prevention and control of NOx emissions include:
 Process optimisation, including kiln smoothing (i.e., maintaining consistently optimum kiln
operating conditions)
 Using low NOx burners (in the main kiln, as well as the precalciner, as applicable);
 Use of staged combustion, as applicable, in pre-heater and pre-heater precalciner kilns;
 Optimizing primary / secondary air flow to ensure appropriate combustion/burning conditions
with tight control of excess oxygen thereby minimizing NOx formation and emissions;
 Employing flame cooling by adding water to the fuel or directly to the flame
Secondary techniques to control NOx emissions include selective noncatalytic reduction (SNCR)
or selective catalytic reduction (SCR).

--- Page 79 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

77
Sulfur dioxide (SO2) is associated primarily with the content of volatile or reactive sulfur in the
raw materials and, to a lesser degree, with the quality of fuels used in the kiln. Measures to
control SO2 emissions include:
 Process optimisation, including kiln smoothing (i.e., maintaining consistently optimum kiln
operating conditions);
 Selection of raw materials and fuels with low volatile sulfur content;
 Use of a vertical raw mill, with gases passing through the mill to recover energy and to reduce
the sulfur content in the gas
 Injection of absorbents and use of scrubbers
Heavy metals: Emissions of heavy metals (for example, lead, cadmium, and mercury) during
cement manufacturing can be significant depending on the presence of heavy metals in raw and
waste materials, and fossil and waste-derived fuels. Nonvolatile metals are mostly bound to the
particulate matter, and can be controlled using dust/PM measures, as discussed in the above
section. Captured waste materials should be managed as a hazardous waste, as described in the
General EHS Guidelines. Volatile metals such as mercury are only partly adsorbed by the raw gas
dust, depending on the temperature of the waste gas. Recommended techniques to limit emissions
of volatile heavy metals include the following:
 Implement controls for the volatile heavy metal content in the input materials and waste fuels
through use of monitoring and materials selection (including selective quarrying techniques to
avoid materials with high levels of metal concentrations).
 For high concentrations of volatile heavy metals (in particular mercury), use of absorption on
activated carbon may be necessary. In addition, selective dust shuttling or ―bleeding‖ of mercury-
enriched kiln dust, combined with sorbent injection, can be used to limit the buildup of mercury
levels within the kiln dust. The resulting solid waste should be managed as a hazardous waste.
Multi-pollutant control measures can also be effective in controlling high concentrations of
volatile heavy metals, such as wet scrubbers and adsorption on activated carbon.
Waste fuels, waste, and associated air emissions: Cement kilns, due to their strongly alkaline
atmospheres and high flame temperatures (up to 2000°C), are capable of using high-calorific-
value waste fuels: for example, used solvents, waste oil, used tires, RDF (refuse derived fuel),
and waste plastics. In exceptional cases, cement kilns can also be used for the disposal of wastes
that have little calorific or mineral value and do not contribute to the clinker production process.
This co-processing of hazardous waste, including polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), obsolete
organochlorine pesticides, and other chlorinated materials should be considered only if
appropriate input controls (for example, control of heavy metal content, heating value, ash
content, chlorine content), process controls, and emission controls are in place. While the use of
waste fuels can allow for the substitution of fossil fuels, depending on their composition, use of
waste fuels can lead to emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), persistent organic
pollutants such as polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs) and dibenzofurans (PCDFs), in
addition to hydrogen fluoride (HF), hydrogen chloride (HCl), and toxic metals and their
compounds if not properly controlled and operated. Facilities using of waste fuel or co-processing
hazardous waste raw material in cement manufacturing should document the amounts and types
of waste that are used either as fuel or as raw material, and the quality standards such as
minimum calorific value and maximum concentration levels of specific pollutants, such as PCB,
chlorine, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH), mercury, and other heavy metals. Adequate

--- Page 80 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

78
monitoring should be conducted when wastes fuels are being fired in cement plants (either as an
alternative fuel or for purpose of waste destruction). Recommended prevention and control
techniques for these types of air pollutants include the following:
 Implement monitoring and control of the volatile heavy metal content in the input materials
and waste fuels though materials selection and through control measures described in the Heavy
Metals section. Nonvolatile metals should be managed according to the recommendations in the
PM/Dust section.
 Implement proper storage and handling practices for hazardous and nonhazardous waste to be
used as waste fuel or raw material, as described in the General EHS Guidelines.
 Directly inject fuels that have volatile metals or high VOC concentrations into the main
burner rather than via the secondary burners.
 Avoid the use of fuels with high content of halogens during secondary firing and during
startup and shutdown phases.
 Ensure rapid cooling of kiln exhaust gases to lower than 200 ºC in long wet and long dry kilns
without preheating (in modern preheater and precalciner kilns, this cooling feature is already
inherent in the design).
 Energy consumption, fuels, and greenhouse gas emissions
Cement is an energy-intensive industry. Electrical energy and fuel costs can represent 40–50
percent of total production costs. The following sector specific issues can be considered:
 Kiln and cooler operations: For new plants and major upgrades, good international
practice for the production of cement clinker involves the use of a dry process kiln with
multistage preheating and pre-calcination (PHP kilns). PHP kilns are the most common kiln
used in the cement manufacturing industry. They have the lowest heat consumption (due to the
high heat recovery from kiln gas in the cyclones and the low kiln heat losses), and no water to
evaporate (compared to wet kiln which uses slurry), while also offering the highest production
capacity. PH kilns are also used widely due to their ease of operation. Heat consumption for PH
kilns is only slightly higher than for PHP kilns.The most common type of clinker cooler now
being installed is the ‗grate cooler,‘ which is produced in many versions. To improve energy
efficiency, the heat from the cooler should be used as hot process air, such as via a tertiary air
duct in the precalciner.
 Fuel consumption and GHG emissions:Greenhouse gas emissions, especially carbon
dioxide (CO2), are mainly associated with fuel combustion and with the decarbonation of
limestone, which in its pure form is 44 percent CO2 by weight. Recommended techniques for
CO2 emission prevention and control, in addition to proper smoothing of kiln operations,
include: Selection of fuel with a lower ratio of carbon content to calorific value (e.g. natural gas,
fuel oil, or some waste fuel); production of blended cements, which have the potential for
significant reduction in fuel consumption and subsequent CO2 emissions per ton of final
product; process selection and operation to promote energy efficiency (dry/ pre-heater / pre-
calciner); and selection of raw materials with lower organic matter content.
 Wastewater
Cement production process does not generally result in significant wastewater (effluent) loads.
Wastewater streams in cement manufacturing result mainly from cleaning activities, surface run-
off, and utility operations for cooling purposes in different phases of the process (e.g., bearings, kiln
rings). The storage and handling of fuels and materials is a potential source of contamination of soil

--- Page 81 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

79
and groundwater if run-off streams are not controlled (e.g.,stormwater flowing through pet–coke,
coal, and waste material stockpiles exposed to the open air may become contaminated).
Stormwater should be prevented from coming into contact with the stockpiles by covering or
enclosing the stockpiles and by installing run-on controls. As discussed above, recommended
pollution prevention techniques for dust emissions from stockpiles of raw materials, clinker and
fuel may also help minimize contamination of stormwater. If stormwater does come in contact with
the stockpiles, soil and groundwater may be protected from potential contamination by paving or
otherwise lining the base of the stockpiles, and installing run-off controls around them to collect the
stormwater in a lined basin and allow dust and other materials to settle before separation, control,
recycling or discharge.
Contaminated streams should be routed to the treatment system for industrial process wastewater.
Techniques for treating industrial process wastewater in this sector include flow and load
equalization with pH adjustment; sedimentation for suspended solids reduction using settling basins
or clarifiers; multimedia filtration for reduction in non-settling suspended solids.
 Solid waste
Solid waste originating from cement manufacturing primarily includesclinker production waste
(mainly composed of spoil rocks, which are removed from the raw materials during the raw meal
preparation), kiln dust removed from the bypass flow and the stack (if it is not recycled in the
process) and dust collected from filters and precipitators. Other waste streams include packaging
and maintenance-related waste (e.g., used oil and scrap metal).Some of these process wastes can be
recycled and reused depending on the process requirements and product specifications. Collected
dust should be recycled within the process wherever feasible. This recycling may take place directly
into the kiln or kiln feed (alkali metal content being the limiting factor) or by blending with finished
cement products. Wherever recycling is not feasible, process waste should be disposed-off through
external waste recyclers / handlers. Contaminated / hazardous waste should be managed by licensed
facilities.
 Noise
Noise pollution is related to several cement manufacturing phases including raw material
extraction; grinding and storage; material handling and transportation; and operation of exhaust
fans, and blowers. Control of noise emissions may include the use of silencers for fans, room
enclosures for mill operators, and noise barriers, among other noise mitigation measures.

2.2.
Health and Safety Issues:
The occupational health and safety impacts of cement manufacturing projects are primarily
associated with exposure to dust, heat, noise, and physical hazards.
Table- Common Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Issues
Hazard
Description
Prevention and Mitigation Measures
Dust
Exposure to fine particulates is
associated with work in most of the
dust-generating stages of cement
manufacturing, but most notably
from raw material handling, and
clinker / cement grinding. Exposure
to active (crystalline) silica dust
(SiO2), when present in the raw
 Control
of
dust
through
good
housekeeping
and
maintenance
(e.g.,
vacuum cleaning systems to prevent dust
buildup on surfaces / paved areas)
 Use of air–conditioned, closed cabins
 Use of dust extraction and recycling
systems to remove dust from work areas,

--- Page 82 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

80
materials, is a relevant potential
hazard in the cement manufacturing
sector.
especially in grinding mills
 Use of air ventilation (suction) in cement-
bagging areas
 Use of PPE, as appropriate (e.g. masks and
respirators) to address residual exposures
following adoption of the above-referenced
process and engineering controls
Other
Physical
hazards
Injuries
during
cement
manufacturing
operations
are
typically related to slips, trips, and
falls; contact with falling /moving
objects; lifting / over-exertion;
hazards
involving
moving
machinery (e.g., trucks, loaders,
bucket elevator, belt conveyor etc.);
welding.
Exposure to heat can occur during
operation and maintenance of kilns
and other hot equipment.
Exhaust fans and grinding mills are
the main sources of noise and
vibrations in cement plants.

 Minimizing the work time required in high
temperature
environments
by
implementing shorter shifts at these
locations
 Shielding
surfaces
where
workers‘
proximity and close contact with hot
equipment is expected, using personal
protective equipment (PPE), as needed
(e.g., insulated gloves and shoes)
 Making available and using, as needed, air
or oxygen supplied respirators
 Control of noise emissions may include the
use of silencers for fans, room enclosures
for mill operators, noise barriers, and, if
noise cannot be reduced to acceptable
levels, personal hearing protection

Table- Common Structural, Fire & Electrical Safety Issues in Bangladesh
Area
Issues commonly observed
Prevention and Mitigation Measures
Structural
Highly
stressed
columns;
undocumented
vertical
extensions; localised areas of high
loads in buildings; discrepancy
between structural drawing and
built structure; minor to major
cracks in structural elements.
 Compliance to regulatory requirements
including
the
Bangladesh
National
Building
Code
(BNBC)
(2015)
or
international codes, such as those compiled
by the International Code Council (ICC),
(2006).
 Undertake periodic structural safety audits
by accredited agencies.
Fire
Inadequate, untested fire alarms;
inadequate
exit
capacity
compared to the occupancy load;
lack of exit signage.
 Compliance with the by-laws of the Fire
Regulation (2014), part of the Bangladesh
Labor (Amendment) Act (2013), which
includes
requirements
regarding
the
formation of a safety committees, and
other measures such as emergency exits,
access to stairs, and provision of personal
protective equipment (PPE).
 Provisions for fire hydrants as per the
requirements of BNBC (2015) and by Fire
Regulation 2014, including water supply

--- Page 83 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

81
specifications according to the building
size / hazard.
 Undertake regular fire audits by accredited
agencies, with mock drills to be conducted
on a periodic basis as per the fire hazard
assessment of the facility.
Electrical
Unsealed entry and exit points for
electrical cable; excessive dust
deposit on cables; cables laid on
floor
without
guarding
protection; oil leaks in generator
room;
inadequate
cable
grounding.
 Undertake electrical safety assessment on a
periodic basis, and ensure workers are
trained and provided with appropriate PPE
based on the risk assessment.

2.3.Community Health & Safety:
Common health and safety impacts on the community during the construction, operation, and
decommissioning of cement manufacturing facilities include:
 Transport of materials
 Traffic safety
 Life and fire safety
 Emergency preparedness and response

2.4.Social Issues
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘

3. Performance Indicators and Monitoring

3.1.
Wastewater Discharge Quality Standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
Bangladesh National Standards*
pH
S.U.
6 – 9
6 – 9
(across all discharge locations, i.e., inland
surface water, public sewer and irrigated land)
Total suspended solids
(TSS)
mg/L
50
150 (inland surface water),
500 (public sewer),
200 (irrigated land)
Temperature increase
oC
No national standard
* The Bangladesh National Standards are not specific to cement sector and are applicable for all the industrial units. The
National standards are defined as per the location of disposal – inland surface water; public sewerage system connected to
treatment at second stage; and irrigated land. In addition to the above mentioned pollutants, there are other pollutants as
well for which standards are specified. Source: Bangladesh Environmental Conservation Rules, 1997.

--- Page 84 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

82
3.2.
Air Emission Standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GII
Bangladesh National Standards
Particulate Matter
mg/Nm3
30-100
Integrated cement unit
250
Clinker grinding unit (production
capacity >1000 tons per day)
200
Clinker grinding unit (production
capacity 200-1000 tons per day)
300
Clinker grinding unit (production
capacity upto 200 tons per day)
400
Dust (other point sources:
clinker cooling and
cement grinding)


mg/Nm3


50

No national standards specific to cement industry
SO2
mg/Nm3
400

No national standards specific to cement industry
NOx
mg/Nm3
600
Hydrogen fluoride
mg/Nm3
TOC
mg/Nm3
10
HCl
mg/Nm3
10
350 (generic value for HCl vapour/mist for
industrial sectors)

3.3.
Resource and Energy Consumption Standards
Inputs per unit of product
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
Bangladesh National
Standards
Fuel energy – cement
GJ/t clinker
3 - 4.2


No national standards
Electric energy – cement
kWh/t equivalent
cement
90 – 150
Electric energy – clinker grinding
kWh/t
40 – 45


3.4.
Waste Generation Standards
Outputs per unit of product
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Waste
Kg/t
0.25-0.6
No national standards

3.5.
Social standards
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘.

4. General Description of Industry Activities
Sector Activity
Sub-sector Activities
Cement
manufacturing
Integrated cement manufacturing units produce their own clinker which
is a core raw material for manufacturing cement. The clinker production
involves following steps:
 Crushing of limestone

--- Page 85 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

83
 Mixing the crushed limestone with sand and clay
 Roasting the mixture at around 1500oC in a rotary kiln
 Quickly cooling down the roasted mixture to produce grey
nodules of clinker
The clinker is then processed with gypsum and other additives in a
grinding mill to produce finely powdered cement.
Clinker grinding
Clinker grinding units directly procure clinker as a raw material to
produce cement. More than 80% of the clinker used in Bangladesh is
imported. The clinker is grinded with gypsum to produce finely
powdered cement.

--- Page 86 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

84
18.4. ESRM Guidance Note for Ceramic Tile and Sanitary Ware
Manufacturing Sector

1. Introduction
The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM for the Ceramic Tile and Sanitary Ware Sector is to
provide a high level indicative summary of potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and
performance levels for transactions in the Ceramic Tile and Sanitary Ware sector in Bangladesh.
The scope of application will be fully aligned with the Section 4 of Guidelines on ESRM for Banks
and FIs. At all times, applicable national regulations are to be followed. Where national regulations
differ from the levels and measures presented in this Guidance Note, loan proposals are expected to
achieve whichever is more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those provided in this
Guidance Note are appropriate, in view of specific loan proposal, a full and detailed justification for
any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This
justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of
human health and the environment. For the purposes of this Guidance Note, manufacturing
activities in this sector include, but are not limited to: raw material processing; mixing; forming;
shape drying; glazing; firing and finishing.

2. Industry Specific Impacts and Management

2.1.
Environmental Issues:
Air emissions
Manufacturing activities in the ceramic sector may generate significant sources of air pollutants
including from raw material processing, mixing, crushing, milling, drying, glazing and firing. The
common sources of air emissions and related mitigation measures are listed below in Table.
Table - Sources of Air Emissions and Mitigation Measures
Air emissions sources and mitigation measures
Raw material processing, mixing and drying: Particulate matter (dust) is generated from
crushing, grinding, screening and mixing activities. Measures to prevent and control dust
emissions include:
 Segregation of material storage areas to minimize dust in operational areas.
 Use of enclosed silos to store bulk powder materials and use of wind protection (e.g.,
artificial barriers or vertical greenery, such as densely growing trees/shrubs) if raw materials are
stored in open piles.
 Use of covered conveyor belts for transport of dusty raw materials.
 Use of covered and vented through or pan mixers.
 Use of enclosures for dusty operations (e.g., grinding, mixing), with maintenance of negative
pressure in closed systems and dedusting of air from suction.
 Use of dust extraction equipment and fabric (bag house) filters, particularly for dry materials
loading and unloading points, and where products are cut / ground and polished.
 Undertake regular maintenance to reduce air leakage and spillage points.
Glazing / spraying: Particulate matter (dust) is generated in mixing and milling processes during

--- Page 87 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

85
glaze preparation / spraying. Measures to prevent and control dust emissions include:
 Use of equipment enclosure for dust producing equipment and use of local exhaust
ventilation with dust abatement (e.g., fabric [bag house] filters)
 Use of wet dust separators to control emissions from spray drying and glazing processes in
fine ceramic manufacturing. Sintered lamellar filters may also be used to separate wet dust from
spray glazing and to clean off-gas from the spraying cabins.
Firing: Kilns use primarily natural gas and to some extent coal and LPG. Emissions include
particulate matter; carbon dioxide (CO2); nitrogen oxides (NOx) from high kiln firing
temperatures, nitrogen content in the raw materials, and the oxidation of nitrogen contained in
fuels; and fluorides (Hydrofluoric acid, HF) and chlorides (hydrocholoric acid, HCl) emissions
which are generated from impurities in clay materials. The heavy metal content of most ceramic
raw materials is generally low and of limited concern, with the exception of some ceramic
pigment glaze materials. Sulfur oxides (SO2) emissions are generally limited due to the use of
low sulfur fuel, however raw materials (e.g., pyrite, gypsum) may contain sulfur. The presence of
carbonates in raw materials may, however, prevent the formation of sulfur emissions because of
their reaction with SO2. Measures to prevent and control emissions include:
 Use of raw materials and additives with low nitrogen, sulfur, chlorine, fluorine, and organic
content to reduce NOx, SO2, HCl, HF, and VOC emissions.
 Optimizing peak flame temperatures in the kiln, and use of low NOx burners to reduce NOx
emissions.
 Use of fabric (bag house) filters to reduce emissions of particulate matter.
 Use of activated carbon filters to reduce low off-gas volumes of VOCs.
 Use of commonly available glazes which do not contain lead or other toxic metals to
minimize heavy metal emissions, and use of particulate matter abatement (e.g., fabric [bag
house] filters).
 Use of dry scrubbers to control HCl and HF emissions.
 Optimizing/controlling the heating process and firing temperature, and use of dry or wet
scrubbers, to control SO2 emissions.
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, in particular CO2, are mainly associated with the use of energy
in the kiln and spray dryer. Please refer to the Energy Consumption section, below, for measures
to improve energy use and reduce GHG emissions.
Energy use and greenhouse gas emissions
Ceramic and sanitary ware manufacturing generates greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The main
sources of GHG emissions include the decarbonisation of the clay and some auxiliary materials
with a natural carbon content that is released during the baking process and, secondly, the emissions
generated by burning fossil fuels to power the manufacturing process. The emissions from the
decarbonisation of clay are intrinsic process emissions and are therefore difficult to reduce.
However, a focus on improvements to energy use and efficiency can result in opportunities to
reduce GHG emissions.
The ceramic industry involves significant use of energy resources, for example as part of drying and
firing operations and in activities involving wet treatments. While the industry currently uses
natural gas as an energy resource, domestic natural gas reserves are depleting. As such, efforts to
maintain the sector‘s access to low GHG emitting fuels such as natural gas or other low emitting

--- Page 88 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

86
alternative fuels should be a priority. In addition to energy resources, low to moderate cost energy
efficiency and conservation techniques, as listed below, should be pursued. In order to identify such
opportunities, facilities should undertake regular energy audits to identify potential energy
efficiency measures, including:
Continued use of low emissions fuels (e.g., natural gas, LPG), and alternative, low emitting
fuels.
Design modifications for ceramic tile and sanitary ware bodies to reduce drying and firing
times.
Improvements in design and performance of kilns and dryers, including:
 Replace inefficient kilns (e.g. down-draft kilns) with tunnel or shuttle kilns or fast-firing
kilns (e.g. roller hearth kilns).
 Automatic control of dryer circuits.
 Automatic control of humidity and temperature within the dryer.
 Better sealing and improved thermal insulation of kilns.
 Use of high velocity burners to improve combustion efficiency and heat transfer.
 Minimisation of passage between dryer and kiln and use of preheating zone of kiln in
finishing and drying process.
 Recovery of excess (waste) heat from kilns for drying and other production activities
Wastewater
Water is used for various functions in the ceramic tile and sanitary ware manufacturing sector,
including as a raw material, as a scrubbing and cleaning agent, and as a medium in the heat
exchangers. In the manufacturing of ceramic products, wastewater is produced from mixing, casting
moulds, glazing, and finishing activities. Process wastewater is generated mainly when clay
materials are flushed out and suspended in running water during the manufacturing process. Typical
pollutants include suspended solids (e.g. clays and insoluble silicates), suspended and dissolved
heavy metals (e.g. lead and zinc), sulfates, boron, and traces of organic matter.
Measures to prevent and control wastewater effluents at different stages of ceramic manufacturing
include:
 Use of high pressure system in the plant for cleaning purposes.
 Use of non-water consuming cleaning system such as a dry-off gas cleaning system instead
of wet-off gas cleaning.
 Use of in-situ waste glaze collection system.
 Maximize re-use of process wastewater at each processing stage, including water used for
cleaning purposes after suitable treatment (water recycling for ceramic tile manufacturing is
typically in the range of 70–80 percent and 30–50 percent for sanitary ware manufacturing)
 Techniques for treating industrial process wastewater in this sector typically include flow
and load equalization with pH adjustment; sedimentation for suspended solids reduction
using settling basins or clarifiers; multimedia filtration for reduction in non-settling
suspended solids; dewatering and disposal of residuals in landfills, or if hazardous in
designated hazardous waste disposal sites. Additional engineering controls may be required
for advanced metals removal using membrane filtration or other physical/chemical treatment
technologies.
Solid and liquid/sludge wastes
Solid and liquid wastes are generated in different stages of ceramic manufacturing. Solid waste
consists mainly of different types of sludge, including sludge from process wastewater treatment,

--- Page 89 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

87
and process sludge resulting from glazing, plaster, and grinding activities. Other process wastes
include broken ware from process activities (e.g. shaping, drying, and firing); broken refractory
material; solids from dust treatments (e.g. flue-gas cleaning and dedusting); spent plaster molds;
spent sorption agents (e.g. granular limestone and limestone dust); and packaging waste (e.g.
plastic, wood, metal, paper).Waste production can be reduced through process enhancements
including: replacing slip casting in plaster molds with pressure slip casting units with polymer
molds; increasing the lifespan of plaster molds (e.g. using harder plaster molds obtained through
use of automatic plaster mixers or vacuum plaster mixers); installing electronic controls for the
firing curve (to optimize the process and reduce the amount of broken ware); and installing spray
booths that allow reclaiming of excess glaze.Waste generation can also be reduced by recycling and
internal reuse of cuttings, broken ware, used plaster molds, and other by-products, including sludge.
Dust particles from loading, unloading, raw material handling, filter dust, and process losses before
firing are mostly re-used in the production process. Dust from flue gas cleaning system can be also
re-used in certain circumstances. Other solid wastes from fired products such as broken wares, and
broken refractory materials from the kiln, can either be appropriately disposed of or used as a raw
material in other industries. Liquid waste in the form of sludge is mainly generated from washing
and cleaning process in different steps. Use of a sludge recycling system can lead to avoidance of
waste generation, save raw material and improve water conservation. For example, sludge can be
recycled into the ceramic molds, particularly in facilities where wet milling is implemented in raw
material preparation. Sludge from fine ceramic and sanitary ware manufacturing can be reused as a
raw material or additive in the manufacture of bricks or expanded clay aggregates; Management
and disposal of hazardous and non-hazardous wastes should be undertaken in accordance with the
Environmental Conservation Act, 1995 (ECA) and Environmental Conservation Rules, 1997 (ECR)
that have provisions for environmentally sound use, storage, transportation, import and export of
hazardous and non-hazardous wastes or its components.

2.2.
Health and Safety Issues:
In terms of occupational health and safety (OHS), key issues in the ceramic tile and sanitary ware
sector include exposure to respiratory, heat, noise/vibration, physical, and electrical hazards.
Facilities should ensure an effective emergency preparedness and response plan is in place. Table
below, provides a list of commonly observed hazards in the ceramic industries and mitigation
measures.
Table -Common Occupational Health and Safety Issues
OHS Issues and prevention / control measures
Respiratory: Respiratory hazards primarily result from exposure to dust emissions, in particular,
inhalation of silica dust. Other potential inhalation hazards may result from glaze application,
airborne refractory ceramic fibers, and combustion by-products. Measures to prevent and mitigate
respiratory hazards include:
 Segregate raw material storage from other operational areas
 Use of local exhaust ventilation with filter units
 Use of kiln venting systems (e.g., adjustable vents mounted over the top of the kilns) for
loading and unloading
 Use of enclosed raw material conveyors
 Regular housekeeping and dust removal from surfaces in working areas (e.g., vacuuming) and

--- Page 90 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

88
wet cleaning instead of dry sweeping
 Avoid use of low solubility glazes containing lead and heavy metals
 Use of well-ventilated areas for glazing and use of spray booths
 Use of personal protective equipment (PPE), such as facemasks with filters, goggles, gloves,
and overalls
 Use of shift and task rotation strategies for workers to minimize exposure (e.g., VOC
exposure)
Heat exposure: Heat exposure may result from worker activities in the areas of high radiant heat
and humidity (e.g., kiln area and handling of hot equipment). Measures to prevent and mitigate
heat exposure related hazards include:
 Adequate ventilation in workplace, (e.g. ducting in air, allowing cross-ventilation, and
installing exhaust fans)
 Provision of air cooled rest rooms for workers in the kiln area
 Reduce the time required for work in high temperature environments (e.g. shorter shifts at
these locations)
 Provision of PPE, such as insulated gloves, shoes, and air- or oxygen supplied respirators),
especially during maintenance operations
Noise / vibration exposure: Noise sources include raw material preparation (e.g. crushing,
grinding, milling, dry and wet mixing, screening, and clarification), pressing and granulation
processes, cutting, grinding and polishing, fan burners in kilns, and packaging activities.
Measures to prevent and mitigate noise exposure include:
 Management of noise as per ECA 1995 and ECR 1997 (Rule 12, Schedule-4). Minimizing
worker exposure to noise greater than 85 dB(A) for more than 8 hours per day without
hearing protection
 Use of acoustic insulating materials, isolation of noise sources (e.g., enclosures), and other
engineering controls
 Installing vibration dampening for mechanical equipment, and limiting duration of exposure
 Use of PPE such as hearing protectors (e.g., ear plugs or ear muffs).
Physical: Physical hazard from moving equipment (kilns, mills, conveyor belts and crushing
equipment). Other physical hazards include handling sharp materials, lifting heavy objects, and
repetitive motions. Chemical hazards may result from chemicals (metal oxides) for glazing.
Measures to prevent and mitigate physical hazards include:
 Implementation of machine guarding and lock-out-tag-out systems
 Use of closed conveyors to transport raw materials
 Incorporating rest breaks and job rotation into work processes
 Use of mechanical material lift assists to eliminate or reduce exertion
 Communicating chemical hazards to workers through labelling and according to national and
internationally recognized standards (e.g., material data safety sheets, MSDS).
 Use of PPE such as helmets with top and side impact protection, safety glasses with side-
shields, protective shades, gloves, overalls, and safety shoes / boots
Electrical: Electrical hazards due to the presence of electrical equipment. Measures to prevent
and mitigate electrical hazards include:
 Marking of all energised devices and lines with warning signs

--- Page 91 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

89
 Locking out (de-charging and leaving open with a controlled locking device) and tagging-out
(warning sign placed on the lock) devices during service or maintenance, and use of
appropriate PPE for electrical work
 Insulation and grounding of electrical equipment, including double insulating/grounding of all
electrical equipment used in environments that are, or may become, wet, and using equipment
with ground fault interrupter (GFI) protected circuits
 Protecting power ccords against damage from traffic by shielding or suspending above traffic
areas
Structural safety is a serious safety concern in the industrial buildings of Bangladesh. The lack of
structural safety in the industrial buildings can also increase the risk of fire and electrical hazards.
Table below, provides a list of structural, fire, and electrical hazards observed in the cement sector
and related prevention and mitigation measures.

Table -Common Structural, Fire & Electrical Safety Issues in Bangladesh
Area
Issues commonly observed
Prevention and Mitigation Measures
Structural Highly
stressed
columns;
undocumented
vertical
extensions; localised areas of
high
loads
in
buildings;
discrepancy
between
structural drawing and built
structure; minor to major
cracks in structural elements.
 Compliance to regulatory requirements including
the Bangladesh National Building Code (BNBC)
(2015) or international codes, such as those compiled
by the International Code Council (ICC), (2006).
 Undertake periodic structural safety audits by
accredited agencies.
Fire
Inadequate,
untested
fire
alarms;
inadequate
exit
capacity compared to the
occupancy load; lack of exit
signage.
 Compliance with the by-laws of the Fire
Regulation (2014), part of the Bangladesh Labor
(Amendment)
Act
(2013),
which
includes
requirements regarding the formation of a safety
committees, and other measures such as emergency
exits, access to stairs, and provision of personal
protective equipment (PPE).
 Provisions
for
fire
hydrants
as
per
the
requirements of BNBC (2015) and by Fire
Regulation
2014,
including
water
supply
specifications according to the building size / hazard.
 Undertake regular fire audits by accredited
agencies, with mock drills to be conducted on a
periodic basis as per the fire hazard assessment of the
facility.
Electrical Unsealed
entry
and exit
points for electrical cable;
excessive dust deposit on
cables; cables laid on floor
without
guarding
protection;
oil
leaks
in
generator room; inadequate
cable grounding.
 Undertake electrical safety assessment on a
periodic basis, and ensure workers are trained and
provided with appropriate PPE based on the risk
assessment.

--- Page 92 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

90
2.3.
Community Health and Safety
Community health and safety impacts during the construction, operation, and decommissioning of
ceramic tile and sanitary ware manufacturing facilities are common to those of most industrial
facilities.

2.4.
Social Issues
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘

3. Performance Indicators and Monitoring

3.1.
Wastewater discharge quality standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
pH
S.U.
6 – 9
6 – 9
(discharge locations to inland surface water,
public sewer, irrigated land)
BOD5
mg/L
50
50 – 250
TSS
mg/L
50
150 (inland surface water), 500 (public sewer),
200 (irrigated land)
Oil and Grease
mg/L
10
10
Lead
mg/L
0.2
0.1-1
Cadmium
mg/L
0.1
0.05 – 0.5
Chromium (total)
mg/L
0.1
0.5 – 1
Cobalt
mg/L
0.1
No National standard
Copper
mg/L
0.1
0.5 – 3
Nickel
mg/L
0.1
1-2
Zinc
mg/L
5-10
Temperature increase
⁰C
No National standard
*The National Standards are not specific to ceramics sector and are applicable for all the industrial units. The
National standards are defined as per the location of disposal – inland surface water; public sewer; irrigated land.
Source: Bangladesh Environmental Conservation Rules, 1997.

3.2.
Air Emissions Standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Particulate Matter
mg/Nm3
50
No national standards
specific to the ceramic
tile and sanitary ware
sector

SO2
mg/Nm3
400
NOX
mg/Nm3
600
HCl
mg/Nm3
30
HF
mg/Nm3
Lead
mg/Nm3
0.5
Cadmium
mg/Nm3
0.2
TOC
mg/Nm3
20

--- Page 93 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

91
3.3.
Resource and energy consumption standards
Ceramic Tile manufacturing – Energy
Consumption
Guideline Values
GIIP
National
Standards
Energy (KJ/kg)
Thermal energy: Spray drying process
980–2,200
No National
standards
Thermal energy: Drying process
250–750
Thermal energy: Firing: once-fired tiles (Tunnel
kilns)
5,400–6,300
Thermal energy Firing: twice-fired tiles (Tunnel
kilns)
6,000–7,300
Thermal energy Firing: once-fired tiles (Roller
hearth kilns)
1,900–4,800
Thermal energy Firing: twice-fired tiles (Roller
hearth kilns)
3,400–4,600
Electric energy Pressing
50–150 (kWh/kg)
Electric energy Drying
10–40 (kWh/kg)
Electric energy Firing
20–150 (kWh/kg)

3.4.
Resource and energy consumption standards
Sanitary Ware manufacturing – Energy
Consumption
Guideline Values
GIIP
National
Standards
Energy (KJ/kg)
Conventional tunnel kiln
9,100–12,000
No National
standards
Modern tunnel kiln with light fiber insulation
4,200–6,500
Roller heath kiln
3,500–5,000
Modern shuttle kiln
8,500–11,000

3.5.
Waste generation standards
Outputs per unit of product
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National
Standards
Glaze waste produced in tile surface
glazing
g/m2 of tile surface
100
No national
standards
Sludge
g/m2 of tile surface
90–150
Solid waste — cuttings and defective
tiles
g/m2 of tile surface
700–1300
Recovery and re-use of glaze in
sanitary ware manufacturing
m3 /day
0.08–0.1
Glaze used per sanitary ware item
kg/item
1.5–3

3.6.
Social standards
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘.

--- Page 94 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

92
4. General Description of Industry Activities
Process stage
Activities
Raw material processing
The major raw materials used in the manufacture of ceramics
range from unprocessed clays and other mined minerals to high
purity powders produced from chemical synthesis. Naturally
occurring raw materials include varieties of clay such as ball
clay, fire clay and common clay; feldspar; talc; silica and
nepheline syenite. Bangladesh imports 100% of the raw
materials for production of ceramic tiles and sanitary wares.
The raw materials typically account for 35 - 40% of the total
production cost. The majority of raw materials and machines
are imported mainly from China, Romania, Indonesia, Italy
and Germany.
Mixing
The purpose of mixing is to combine the constituent raw
materials to provide more chemically and physically uniform
material for forming activities. Binders and additives are added
to the mixture to form temporary bonds between raw material
grains so that the shape is maintained until it is fired
Forming
The ceramic mix is moulded and consolidated in specific
molds for the desired shape and size which is achieved through
dry forming, plastic molding or wet forming.
Shape drying
Drying is undertaken either by continuous or periodic dryers
which are used to reduce the moisture content of the products
and prevent any shrinkage, distortion, cracking, and spalling.
Glazing
Glazing provides a smooth and shiny finish on the products.
Firing
Firing is done either through continuous or batch process
mainly to increase the structural integrity of the product by
reducing the number of pores, increasing the density, and
bonding the individual grains into a strong hard mass.
Finishing
At the finishing stage, machining operations may be necessary
to produce ceramic products whose final shape or dimensional
tolerance cannot be achieved technically or with sufficient
accuracy during primary processing (especially for larger
shapes or blocks). Porcelain tiles may be further polished to
achieve a shiny, unglazed homogenous tile surface.

--- Page 95 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

93
18.5. ESRM Guidance Note for Fertilizer Manufacturing Sector

1. Introduction
The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM for the Fertilizer Manufacturing Sector is to provide
a high level indicative summary of summary of potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and
performance levels for transactions in the Fertilizer Manufacturing sector in Bangladesh. The scope
of application will be fully aligned with the Section 4 of Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and FIs.
At all times, applicable national regulations are to be followed. Where national regulations differ
from the levels and measures presented in this Guidance Note, loan proposals are expected to
achieve whichever is more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those provided in this
Guidance Note are appropriate, in view of specific loan proposal, a full and detailed justification for
any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This
justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of
human health and the environment.

2. Industry Specific Impacts and Management
2.1.
Environmental Issues:
 Air Emissions – Nitrogenous fertilizer manufacturing processes
Air emissions from nitrogenous fertilizer manufacturing facilities generally consist of greenhouse
gases (GHGs, mainly carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide), other gaseous inorganic compounds, and
particulate (dust) emissions (in particular dust emissions of less than 10 microns in aerodynamic
diameter, [PM10] from prilling activities).
The air emissions sources and pollutants are listed by production process in Table below, along
with prevention and control techniques to mitigate emissions.
Table - Air Emissions Sources and Prevention/Control Measures for Nitrogenous Fertilizers
Manufacturing
Sources and Prevention/Control of Air Emissions for Nitrogenous Fertilizers Manufacturing
Ammonia production: Process Air Emissions from Ammonia Production consist mainly of
natural gas, hydrogen (H2), carbon dioxide (CO2), ammonia (NH3), and carbon monoxide (CO).
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) may be present depending on the fuel used. Fugitive emissions of
ammonia (NH3) from storage tanks, valves, flanges, and tubing may also occur, especially during
transportation or transfer. Non-routine emissions associated with process upsets or accidents may
contain natural gas, carbon monoxide, hydrogen, carbon dioxide, Volatile Organic Compounds
(VOCs), nitrogen oxide (NOX), and ammonia.
 Use synthesis NH3 purge gas treatment to recover NH3& H2 before combustion of remainder
in primary reformer
 Increase the residence time for off-gas in the high temperature zone of the primary reformer
 Ammonia emissions from relief valves / pressure controls should be collected and sent to a
flare or wet scrubber
 Install leak detection methods to detect fugitive emissions of ammonia from process and
storage
 Implement maintenance programs, particularly in stuffing boxes on valve stems and seals on
relief valves

--- Page 96 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

94
 Where ammonia and urea facilities are integrated, ammonia process-derived CO2 can be
consumed almost completely if the produced ammonia is transformed into urea.
Urea production:Process emissions from urea production consist mainly of ammonia and
particulate matter (dust). Fugitive emissions of ammonia from tanks, valves, flanges, and tubing
may also occur. Prilling towers and granulators are a major source of emission of urea dust. The
final product is prilled or granulated requiring a large volume of cooling air, which is
subsequently discharged to the atmosphere.
 Reduction of dust emissions by producing granular rather than prilled product
 Installation of prilling towers with natural draft cooling instead of towers with forced/induced
draft air cooling
 Scrubbing of off-gases with process condensate prior to discharge to atmosphere, and
reprocessing the recovered urea solution
 Use of baghouse filters to prevent the emission of dust laden air from transfer points, screens,
bagging machines, etc., coupled with an urea dust dissolving system which allows recycling
of urea to the process
 Flash melting of solid urea over-size product which allows urea recycling to the process;
 Collection of solid urea spillages on a dry basis, avoiding washing of surfaces
 Connection of both safety relief valves/seals of the ammonia/urea pumps, and tank vents to a
flare.
Nitric Acid production: Process Emissions from Nitric Acid Manufacturing consist primarily of
nitric oxide (NO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and nitrogen oxide from the tail gas of the acid
absorption tower, nitrous oxide (N2O), trace amounts of nitric acid (HNO3) mist from the filling
of acid storage tanks, and ammonia.
Recommendations to prevent and control NOx emissions include the following:
 Ensure that a sufficient air supply is provided to the oxidizer and absorber
 Ensure that high pressure conditions are maintained, especially in nitric acid production
absorption columns
 Prevent high temperatures in the cooler-condenser and absorber
 Develop a maintenance program to prevent operation with faulty equipment such as
compressors or pumps that lead to lower pressures and leaks, and decrease plant efficiency
 Reduce NOx emissions by increasing the efficiency of the existing process absorption tower
or incorporating an additional absorption tower
 Apply a catalytic reduction process to treat tail gases from the absorption tower
 Install active molecular sieves to catalytically oxidize NO to NO2 and selectively adsorb
NO2, returning the thermally stripped NO2 to the absorber
 Install wet scrubbers with an aqueous solution of alkali hydroxides or carbonates, ammonia,
urea, potassium permanganate, or caustic chemicals (e.g. caustic scrubbers with sodium
hydroxide, sodium carbonate, or other strong bases), recovering NO and NO2 as nitrate or
nitrate salts
Recommendations to prevent and control N2O emissions include the following:
 Install selective catalytic reduction (SCR) units operating around 200°C with various catalysts
(platinum, vanadium pentoxide, zeolites, etc.) or, less frequently, non-selective catalytic
reduction (NSCR) units
 Integrate a decomposition chamber in the burner to reduce the production of N2O by

--- Page 97 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

95
increasing the residence time in the oxidation reactor
 Use a selective de-N2O catalyst in the high temperature zone (between 800 and 950 ºC) of the
oxidation reactor
 Install a combined N2O and NOX abatement reactor between the final tail gas heater and the
tail gas turbine.
Ammonium Nitrate and Calcium Ammonium Nitrate Manufacturing:Process emissions from
ammonium nitrate and calcium ammonium nitrate manufacturing consist mainly of ammonia and
dust from neutralizers, evaporators, prill towers, granulators, driers and coolers. Fugitive
emissions of ammonia arise from storage tanks and process equipment.
 Install steam droplet separation techniques (e.g., knitted wire, mesh demister pads, wave plate
separators and fibre pad separators using, for example, polytetrafluoroethylene [PTFE] fibres)
or scrubbing devices (e.g., packed columns, venturi scrubbers and irrigated sieve plates) to
reduce emissions of ammonia and ammonium nitrate in the steam from neutralizers and
evaporators.
 Treat and re-use contaminated condensate using techniques including stripping with air or
steam with the addition of alkali to liberate ionized ammonia if required, or use distillation
and membrane separation processes such as reverse osmosis
 Adopt the lowest practical melt temperature to reduce emissions of ammonia and ammonium
nitrate (and calcium carbonate in calcium ammonium nitrate (CAN) production) from prilling
and granulation emissions
 Remove ammonia emissions from prilling and granulation by neutralization in a wet
scrubber. Wet scrubbers normally use an acid circulating solution. The solution from a wet
scrubber will normally be recycled to the process
 Remove ammonium nitrate fumes from prilling through scrubbing
 Remove small particles of ammonium nitrate (mini prills), carried out with the air stream
through cyclones, bag filters and wet scrubbers
 Adopt an enclosed granulation process instead of prilling technique where feasible
 Install an extraction, capture and filter system for ventilation air from areas with dust-
generating product-handling activities to prevent fugitive emissions of particulates.

Table -Sources and Prevention/Control of Air Emissions for Phosphate Fertilizers
Manufacturing
Production processes and related air
emissions sources
Mitigation measures
Process Emissions from Phosphoric Acid
Production:Process
emissions
from
phosphoric
acid
production
include
gaseous
fluorides
in
the
form
of
hydrofluoric
acid
(HF)
and
silicon
tetrafluoride (SiF4), released during the
digestion
of
phosphate
rock,
which
typically contains 2-4% fluorine. The
emissions generally associated with the
thermal production process of phosphoric
Recommended emission prevention and control
measures include the following:
 Properly select the phosphate rock (in terms of
P2O5-content, F-content, CaO/ P2O5 ratio, and
physical quality) to minimize the amount of acid
required in the wet production process, reduce
emissions into the environment and increase the
possibility of phosphor-gypsum reuse
 Select proper size of screens and mills (e.g.
roller or chain mills

--- Page 98 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

96
acid include phosphate, fluoride, dust,
cadmium (Cd), Lead (Pb), zinc (Zn), and
radionuclides (Po-210 and Pb-210). Dust
emissions,
containing
water-insoluble
fluoride, may occur during the unloading,
storage, handling and grinding of the
phosphate rock, which is transferred to
storage and grinding sections by conveyor
belts or trucks.
 Use covered conveyor belts and indoor storage
 Apply good housekeeping measures (e.g.
frequently cleaning / sweeping facility surfaces
and the quay)
 Recover dust from phosphate rock grinding
through use of properly operated and maintained
fabric filters, ceramic filters, and / or cyclones
 Treat
gaseous
fluoride
emissions
using
scrubbing systems (e.g. void spray towers,
packed beds, cross-flow venture, and cyclonic
column scrubbers). Fluorine is recovered as
fluosilicic acid, from which silica is removed
through filtration. A diluted solution of
fluosilicic acid (H2SiF6) may be used as the
scrubbing liquid. Recovering of H2SiF6 is an
additional possibility for fluoride emission
reduction
Process emissions from superphosphate
phosphate fertilizer production include
dust emissions during unloading, handling,
grinding, and curing of phosphate rock, in
addition to granulation and crushing of
superphosphates. Emissions of gaseous
hydrofluoric
acid
(HF),
silicon
tetrafluoride (SiF4), and chlorides may
also
be
generated
from
acidulation,
granulation and drying. Ammonia (NH3)
and nitrogen oxides (NOx) may be
generated
during
the
drying
and
neutralization phases of ammonium nitrate
fertilizers. In addition, during the reaction
of phosphate rock with acid, limited
amounts of organic compounds (including
mercaptans), present in the phosphate
rock, are released and may cause odor.
Recommended emission prevention and control
measures
include the following:
 Use of direct granulation may reduce the levels
of fugitive emissions compared with curing
emissions from indirect granulation. If indirect
granulation is used, the curing section should be
an indoor system with vents connected to a
scrubbing system or to the granulation section
 Use of plate bank product cooling systems to
reduce air flow requirements (e.g. instead of
rotary drums or fluid bed coolers)
 Consider use of fabric filters or high efficiency
cyclones and/or fabric filters rather than a wet
scrubbing system to treat exhaust air from
neutralization, granulation, drying, coating and
product coolers and equipment vents, in order to
avoid creation of additional wastewater. Filtered
air should be recycled as dilution air to the dryer
combustion system
 Emissions
from
granulation
should
be
minimized through application of surge hoppers
to
product
size distribution measurement
systems for granulation recycle control.
Process
Emissions
from
Compound
Fertilizer
Production.
Compound
fertilizers (NPK) are typically produced
Recommended measures to prevent and control air
emissions
include the following:

--- Page 99 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

97
from mixed acids or nitro-phosphate. Air
emissions from NPK produced using the
mixed acids route include ammonia
emissions from the ammonization reactors;
nitrogen oxides, mainly NO and NO2 with
some nitric acid, from phosphate rock
digestion in nitric acid; fluorides from the
phosphate
rock
reactions;
aerosol
emissions, including ammonium nitrate
(NH4NO3), ammonium fluoride (NH4F),
and ammonium chloride (NH4Cl), formed
in the gas-phase neutralization reaction
between ammonia and acidic components,
as well as by sublimation from the boiling
reaction mixture; and fertilizer dust
originating from drying and cooling
drums, and from other sources (e.g.
screens, crushers, and conveyors).
 Reduce NOX emission from nitric acid use in
phosphate rock digestion by controlling the
reactor temperature optimizing the rock / acid
ratio, and adding urea solution
 Treat gases from the digestion reactor in a spray
tower scrubber to recover NOX and fluorine
compounds. The pH may be adjusted by the
addition of ammonia
 Reduce NOx and odor emissions by selecting
high grade phosphate rock with low contents of
organic compounds and ferrous salts
 Control
particulate
matter
emissions,
as
discussed in the phosphoric acid production
section
 Prevent
and/or
control
emissions
from
granulation and product cooling include:
o Scrubbing of gases from the granulator
and the dryer in venturi scrubbers with
recirculating ammonium phosphate or
ammonium sulfo-phosphate solution
o Discharge of scrubbed gases through
cyclonic columns irrigated with an
acidic solution
o Use of high efficiency cyclones to
remove particulates from dryer gases
prior to scrubbing
o Recycling of the air coming from the
cooling equipment as secondary air to
the dryer after dedusting
o Treating
ammonia
emissions
by
scrubbing with acidic solutions
 Fluoride emissions should be controlled through
scrubbing systems, as discussed for phosphoric
acid production
 Emissions to air from phosphate rock digestion,
sand washing and CNTH filtration should be
reduced by applying appropriate controls (e.g.
multistage scrubbing, conversion into cyanides)
 Ammonia in off-gases from the Nitrophosphoric
neutralization steps should be removed through
counter current scrubbers, with pH adjustment
to most efficient scrubbing condition (pH 3-4),
with a mixture of HNO3 and/or H2SO4
 Ammonia emissions from the granulation /

--- Page 100 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

98
drying sections should be treated by scrubbing
with acidic solutions
 Minimize contact between wastes containing
NOX and NH3 to prevent aerosol formation in
NPK nitrophosphate route
 Reduce aerosol emission by installing cyclones
and scrubbers
 Reduce fluorides emissions by recycling of
warm air
 Industrial Wastewater from Nitrogenous Fertilizer Manufacturing
Process water discharges from nitrogenous fertilizer manufacturing plants are limited typically to
acid wash from scheduled cleaning activities and purges, effluents from wet scrubbers, accidental
releases, leaks of small quantities of liquids from product storage tanks, and acidic and caustic
effluents from the boiler feed water preparation.
Effluent from Ammonia Plants: During normal operations, plant discharges may include releases
of process condensates or scrubbing effluents of waste gases containing ammonia and other by-
products. Process condensates typically arise from condensation between shift reactors and
absorption of carbon dioxide, and from carbon dioxide overheads. Such condensates may contain
ammonia, methanol, and amines (e.g., methylamines, dimethylamines and trimethylamines). In
partial oxidation, soot and ash removal may impact water discharges if not handled adequately.
Recommended pollution prevention and control practices include:
 Condensates should be steam-stripped to reduce the ammonia content also steam-stripper
emissions may require additional ammonia emissions controls
 Ammonia absorbed from purge and flash gases should be recovered in a closed loop to
avoid the occurrence of aqueous ammonia emissions
 Soot from gasification in partial oxidation processes should be recovered and recycled to the
process.
Effluent from Urea Plants: A urea plant generates a significant stream of process water containing
ammonia, carbon dioxide, and urea (e.g., a 1,000 ton per day plant generates approximately 500
cubic meters per day [m3/d] of process water). Other sources include ejector steam, flush, and seal
water. Recommended pollution prevention and control practices include:
 Improve evaporation heater/separator design to minimize urea entrainment;
 Remove NH3, CO2, and urea from the process water in a process water treatment unit, and
recycle the gases to the synthesis to optimize raw material utilization and reduce effluents;
 Provide adequate storage capacity for plant inventory to prepare for plant upset and
shutdown conditions;
 Install submerged tanks to collect plant washings and other contaminated streams from
drains for recycling to process or conveying to the process water treatment unit.
Effluents from Nitric Acid Plants: Liquid effluents from a nitric acid plant includes diluted
ammonium nitrite/ nitrate solution from periodic washing (typically once per day) of the NOx
compressor and from the cooler-condenser drain for a period after plant start-up; aqueous ammonia
solution from evaporator blow down; blow down of water containing dissolved salts from the steam
drum; and occasional emissions from the purging and sampling of nitric acid solutions.
Recommended pollution prevention and control practices include:

--- Page 101 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

99
 Steam Steam-inject the NOX compressor to avoid any liquid effluent;
 Arrange for acidification during start-up to avoid the need to drain the cooler-condenser
 Conduct steam stripping to recover the ammonia into the process and limit emissions of
aqueous ammonia from the evaporator blow down.
Effluents from Ammonium nitrate (AN) / Calcium Ammonium Nitrate (CAN) Plants: AN/CAN
plants produce a surplus of water to be treated for discharge or possibly recycled to other units in
the nitrogenous fertilizers production complex. Their process effluents typically include
condensates containing up to 1percent ammonia and up to 1percent ammonium nitrate from
reactors (neutralizers) and evaporator boil-off, and ammonium nitrate and nitric acid from plant
wash-down. Unabated emissions into water can be up to 5,000mg AN as N/l and 2,500mg NH3 as
N/l (6 and 3 kilograms per ton (kg/t) of product respectively). Recommended pollution prevention
and control practices include:
 Internally recovery of ammonium nitrate and ammonia (e.g. scrubber liquor from the
granulation plant air cleaning section being recycled through the further evaporation stages
on the granulation plant)
 Integrate AN/CAN plants with nitric acid production
 Treat steam contaminated with ammonia or ammonium nitrate, before condensation, by
droplet separation techniques and scrubbing devices (as discussed under Air Emissions in
this document)
 Treat process water (condensate) by stripping with air or steam with the addition of alkali to
liberate ionized ammonia as needed; ion exchange; distillation; or membrane separation
processes.
Techniques for treating industrial process wastewater in this sector include filtration for separation
of filterable solids; flow and load equalization; sedimentation for suspended solids reduction using
clarifiers; ammonia and nitrogen removal using physical-chemical or biological nitrification-
denitrification treatment methods; dewatering and disposal of residuals in designated waste
landfills. Additional engineering controls maybe required for capturing ammonia from air stripping
operations and for odour control.
 Industrial Wastewater from Phosphate Fertilizer Manufacturing
Effluents from phosphoric acid plants: Consist of discharges from the vacuum cooler condensers
and the gas scrubbing systems used for condensation and cleaning of vapors from process
operations. Condensed acidic vapors may contain fluorine and small amounts of phosphoric acid.
Water from the slurry used to transport phosphor-gypsum, the by-product from wet phosphoric acid
production, may be released as effluent if it is not recirculated back into the process. Emissions to
water for the disposal of gypsum may contain a considerable amount of impurities, such as
phosphorus and fluorine compounds, cadmium and other heavy metals, and radio-nuclides.
Drainage from material stockpiles may contain heavy metals (e.g. Cadmium, Mercury and Lead),
fluorides, and phosphoric acid. Specific emissions to water from the thermal process of phosphoric
acid production may include phosphorus and fluorine compounds, dust, heavy metals, and
radionuclides.
Recommended effluents management measures include the following:
 Select phosphate rock with low levels of impurities to produce clean gypsum and reduce
potential impacts from disposal of gypsum;

--- Page 102 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

100
 Consider dry systems for air pollution abatement (versus wet scrubbing) to reduce
wastewater. To reduce fluoride emissions, the installation of scrubbers with scrubber liquids
may be necessary;
 Recover fluorine released from the reactor & evaporators as a commercial by-product
(fluosilicic acid);
 Scrubber liquors should be disposed of after neutralization with lime or limestone to
precipitate fluorine as solid calcium fluoride, if the fluorine is not to be recovered;
 Recycle water used for the transport of phosphogypsum back into process following a
settling step;
 Where available, consideration should be given to use seawater as scrubbing liquid, to
facilitate reaction of fluorine to harmless calcium fluoride.
 Minimize contamination of the scrubber effluent with phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5) by
conveying vapors from vacuum flash coolers and vacuum evaporators to a separator to
remove phosphoric acid droplets
 Minimize contamination of the scrubber effluent with phosphorus pentoxide P2O5 using
entrainment separators. Additional phosphate removal can be achieved by applying
magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite) or by calcium phosphate precipitation
 Consider decadmation of H3PO4 up to 95% by reactive extraction with an organic solvent.
Effluent from Superphosphate Fertilizer Production:The main source of wastewater in
phosphate fertilizer production is the wet scrubbing systems to treat off-gases. Contaminants may
include filterable solids, total phosphorus, ammonia, fluorides, heavy metals (e.g. Cd, Hg, Pb), and
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD).
Recommended effluents management measures include the following:
 Recycling of scrubber liquids back into the process should be maximized.
 Production of Acidulated Phosphate rock (PAPR), a fertilizer product consisting of a
mixture of superphosphate and phosphate rock, in addition to Superphosphate (SSP), and
Triplesuperphosphate (TSP) products can reduce wastewater volumes.
Effluent from compound fertilizer production: Effluents are usually limited from NPK mixed
acids route facilities, mainly consisting of wastewater from granulation and exhaust gas scrubbing.
Effluent from NPK facilities employing the nitrophosphate route may contain ammonia, nitrate,
fluoride and phosphate. Ammonia is found in the effluents of the condensates of the
ammonium nitrate evaporation or the neutralization of the nitro phosphoric acid solution. Solutions
containing ammonium nitrate must be pumped with care to limit the risks of explosions. The main
sources of nitrate and fluoride levels in effluent are the scrubber liquors from phosphate digestion
and sand (removed from the process slurry) washing. Washing of sand also generates phosphate
content in the effluent.
Recommended effluent management measures include the following:
 Recycle the sand washing liquor to reduce phosphate levels in wastewater effluents
 Avoid co-condensation of vapors from ammonium nitrate evaporation
 Recycle NOX scrubber liquor to reduce ammonia, nitrate, fluoride and phosphate levels
 Recycle liquors resulting from scrubbing of exhaust gases from neutralization
 Consider reusing effluents as scrubber medium
 Treat multi-stage scrubbing liquors, after circulation, through settling (separation of solids),
and recycle the thickened portion back to the reactors.

--- Page 103 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

101
 Consider combined treatment of exhaust gases from neutralization, evaporation and
granulation. This enables a recycling of all scrubber liquids to the production process and
reduce waste water generation
 Treat waste water through a biological treatment with nitrification/denitrification and
precipitation of phosphorous compounds.
 Hazardous Materials
Nitrogenous and phosphate fertilizer manufacturing plants use, store, and distribute hazardous
materials (e.g., acids and ammonia, among others). Manufacture and distribution of materials
should be conducted according to applicable international requirements where applicable.
 Waste
Waste from nitrogenous fertilizer manufacturing facilities: Spent catalysts are the most common
hazardous waste produced by nitrogenous fertilizer manufacturing facilities after their replacement
in scheduled turnarounds of gas desulphurization, ammonia plants, and nitric acid plants. The most
common non-hazardous wastes are nitrogen-containing dust particulates from prilling and
granulators dust control systems. Recommended management strategies for spent catalysts include:
 Proper on-site management, including submerging pyrophoric spent catalysts in water
during temporary storage and transport until final treatment to avoid uncontrolled
exothermic reactions
 Return to the manufacturer for regeneration or recovery
 Off-site management by specialized companies that can recover the heavy or precious
metals through recovery and recycling processes whenever possible, or who can otherwise
manage spent catalysts or their non-recoverable materials.
Recommended management strategies for recovered dust and off-spec products include the
following:
 Recycling to their specific production units or to fertilizer mixing units in the manufacturing
plant
 Providing to third party users (merchants and farmers) for their subsequent utilization.
Waste from phosphate fertilizer manufacturing facilities: Non-hazardous solid wastes may be
generated from some phosphate fertilizer manufacturing processes, including phosphogypsum from
wet phosphoric acid production, and quartz sand from NPK production using the nitrophosphate
route. Quartz sand should be separated, washed, and recycled as a building material. There is
limited hazardous waste generated from the phosphate fertilizer manufacturing processes.
Phosphogypsum is the most significant by-product in wet phosphoric acid production
(approximately 4 - 5 tons of phosphogypsum is produced for every ton of phosphoric acid
produced). Phosphogypsum contains a wide range of impurities (residual acidity, fluorine
compounds, trace elements such as mercury, lead, and radioactive component). Industry-specific
pollution prevention and control practices include
 Depending on its potential hazardousness (e.g. whether it emits radon) phosphor-gypsum
may be processed to improve its quality and reused (e.g. as building material). Possible
options include: 1) Production of cleaner phosphor-gypsum from raw materials (phosphate
rock) with low levels of impurities and 2) Use of repulping
 Use of di-hemihydrate recrystallization process with double stage filtration;

--- Page 104 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

102
 If phosphor-gypsum cannot be recycled due to the unavailability of commercially and
technically viable alternatives, it should be managed as a hazardous or nonhazardous
industrial waste, depending on its characteristics.
 Additional management alternatives may include backfilling in mine pits, dry stacking and
wet stacking.
 Noise
Typical sources of noise emissions in both nitrogenous and phosphate fertilizer manufacturing
operations include large size rotating machines such as compressors and turbines, pumps, electric
motors, air coolers, rotating drums, spherodizers, conveyors belts, cranes, fired heaters, and from
emergency depressurization.
2.2.
Health and Safety Issues:
The occupational health and safety impacts of fertilizer manufacturing facilities are primarily
associated with process safety, chemical and fire/explosion hazards, and hazardous materials.
Tables below, provide a list of commonly observed hazards and related prevention and mitigation
measures.
Table - Occupational Health & Safety Issues: Nitrogenous Fertilizer Manufacturing
Hazard
Description
Prevention and Mitigation Measures
Process
Safety
Process safety programs
should be implemented,
due to industry-specific
characteristics, including
complex chemistry
reactions,
use
of
hazardous
materials
(e.g.,
toxic,
reactive,
flammable or explosive
compounds) and multi-
step organic synthesis
reactions are conducted.
Process safety management includes the following
actions:
 Physical hazard testing of materials and reactions;
 Hazard analysis studies to review the process
chemistry and engineering practices, including
thermodynamics / kinetics;
 Examination
of
preventive
maintenance
and
mechanical integrity of the process equipment and
utilities;
 Worker training;
 Development
of
operating
instructions
and
emergency response procedures
Chemical
Hazards
Toxic chemicals in the
nitrogenous
fertilizer
facilities
include
ammonia,
nitric
acid
vapor,
gaseous
formaldehyde, and urea
or AN dust.
 Installation of gas detectors in hazard areas;
 Avoid nitric acid spills or take precautions to control
and minimize them. Nitric acid is highly corrosive
and any form of dermal contact should be avoided;
 Provide adequate ventilation in all areas where
ammonia, nitric acid and aqueous formaldehyde is
handled;
 Provide air extraction and filtration in all indoor areas
where urea and AN dust can be generated.
 Use refrigerated storage for large quantities of liquid
ammonia since the initial release of ammonia in the
case of line or tank failure is slower than in
pressurized ammonia storage systems;
 Implement and maintain a specific Emergency
Management Plan, per below section on Community

--- Page 105 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

103
Health and Safety.
 Provide training and personal protection equipment
for personnel
Fire
Explosion
Hazards
Common causes of fire
and
explosions
in
nitrogenous
facilities
include:
fires
and
explosions
due
to
accidental
release
of
synthetic
gas
in
ammonia
plants;
formation of explosive
gas mixture in the inert
gas
scrubbers
and
ammonia release in urea
facilities; explosions of
air/ammonia mixture and
nitrite/nitrate
salts
in
nitric
acid
plants;
initiation of fire and
explosion by ammonium
nitrate,
an
oxidizing
agent in the AN plants;
and fires of fertilizer
products
or
dust
contaminated with oil or
other
combustible
materials in the presence
of a heat source.
 Install leak detection units and other devices (alarm
detection systems, such as automatic pH monitoring
in nitric acid plants) to detect releases early;
 Segregate process areas, storage areas, utility areas,
and safe areas, and adoption of safety distances.
Avoid siting ammonia storage tanks close to areas
where there is a risk of fire / explosion;
 Limit the inventory which may be released through
isolation of large inventories from facility operations,
and isolation and blow down of pressurized
flammable gases inventories;
 Remove potential ignition sources;
 Implement procedures to avoid and control hazardous
gas mixtures, for instance reducing below 10 parts per
million(ppm) hydrogen content in CO2 feed in urea
plants,
 Control the ammonia-to-air ratio with automatic shut-
off valves in nitric acid plants;
 Avoid pressurizing large quantities of nitric acid for
loading/unloading;
 Use carbon austenitic stainless steel for nitric acid
tanks, vessels and accessories;
 Design AN/CAN storage according to internationally
recognized
guidance
and
requirements.
These
requirements generally cover the storage areas with
respect
to
their
structural
and
operational
requirements. An adequate fire detection and fighting
system should be installed;
 Remove or dilute the release and limiting the area
affected by the loss of containment.

--- Page 106 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

104
Table - Occupational Health & Safety Issues: Phosphate Fertilizer Manufacturing
Hazard
Description
Mitigation Measures
Process
Safety


Please refer to Table above for Process Safety considerations.
Chemical
Hazards
Ammonia
and
acids
vapors, especially HF,
are
common
toxic
chemicals in phosphate
fertilizer plants.
 Avoid
contact
of
acids with
strong caustic
substances. The resulting reaction is exothermic and
may cause splashes;
 Control fluoride gas build up in phosphoric acid
storage tanks;
 Install gas detectors in hazard areas;
 Provide
adequate
ventilation
(e.g.
air
extraction/filtration systems) in all areas where
products are produced, stored, and handled;
 Provide training and personal protection equipment
for personnel
Fire
Explosion
Hazards
Decomposition, fire and
explosion hazards may
be generated from slurry
pump explosions due to
insufficient flow through
the pump or incorrect
design;
slurry
decompositions due to
low pH, high temperature
and contaminated raw
materials; and hydrogen
gas generation due to
phosphoric acid contact
with ferrous metals.

 Inventory of ammonia, nitric and sulfuric acids
should be kept as low as possible. Supply by pipeline
is recommended in integrated chemical complexes;
 NPK fertilizer decomposition hazard should be
prevented
through
temperature
control
during
production,
adjustment
of
formulations,
and
reduction of impurities. Compound build–up on the
inlet vanes in the dryer should be avoided and
uniform temperature profile of the air inlet should be
ensured;
 Segregating process areas, storage areas, utility areas,
and safe areas, and adopting of safety distances.
 Implementing
well
controlled
operation
and
procedures in avoiding hazardous gas and slurry
mixtures;
 NPK storage should be designed according to
internationally
recognized
guidance
and
requirements. Adequate fire detection and fighting
system should be installed.
 Storage areas should be cleaned before any fertilizer
is introduced. Spillage should be cleared up as soon
as practicable. Fertilizer contamination with organic
substances during storage should be prevented; and
 Fertilizers should not be stored in proximity of
sources of heat, or in direct sunlight or in conditions
where temperature cycling can occur.
 Contact of phosphoric acid with ferrous metal
component should be prevented. Stainless steel

--- Page 107 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

105
should be used for components possibly in contact
with the acid.

Table -Common Structural, Fire & Electrical Safety Issues in Bangladesh
Area
Issues commonly observed
Prevention and Mitigation Measures
Structural Highly
stressed
columns;
undocumented
vertical
extensions; localised areas of
high
loads
in
buildings;
discrepancy
between
structural drawing and built
structure; minor to major
cracks in structural elements.
 Compliance to regulatory requirements including
the Bangladesh National Building Code (BNBC)
(2015) or international codes, such as those
compiled by the International Code Council
(ICC), (2006).
 Undertake periodic structural safety audits by
accredited agencies.
Fire
Inadequate,
untested
fire
alarms;
inadequate
exit
capacity compared to the
occupancy load; lack of exit
signage.
 Compliance with the by-laws of the Fire
Regulation (2014), part of the Bangladesh Labor
(Amendment)
Act
(2013),
which
includes
requirements regarding the formation of a safety
committees,
and
other
measures
such
as
emergency exits, access to stairs, and provision of
personal protective equipment (PPE).
 Provisions
for
fire
hydrants
as
per
the
requirements of BNBC (2015) and by Fire
Regulation
2014,
including
water
supply
specifications according to the building size /
hazard.
 Undertake regular fire audits by accredited
agencies, with mock drills to be conducted on a
periodic basis as per the fire hazard assessment of
the facility.
Electrical Unsealed
entry
and exit
points for electrical cable;
excessive dust deposit on
cables; cables laid on floor
without guarding/protection;
oil leaks in generator room;
inadequate cable grounding.
 Undertake electrical safety assessment on a
periodic basis, and ensure workers are trained and
provided with appropriate PPE based on the risk
assessment.

2.3.
Community Health & Safety:
Community health and safety hazards during the operation of phosphate and nitrogenous fertilizer
manufacturing facilities relate to the management, storage and shipping of hazardous materials and
products (e.g., ammonia, nitric acid, ammonium nitrate for nitrogenous fertilizer facilities), with
potential for accidental leaks / releases of toxic and flammable gases, and the disposal of wastes

--- Page 108 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

106
(e.g., phosphogypsum, off-spec products, sludge). Plant design and operations should include
safeguards to minimize and control hazards to the community, including the following measures:
 Identify reasonable design leak cases;
 Assess the effects of potential leaks on surrounding areas, including groundwater and soil
pollution;
 Assess potential risks arising from hazardous material transportation and select the most
appropriate transport routes to minimize risks to communities and third parties;
 Select plant location with respect to the inhabited areas, meteorological conditions (e.g.
prevailing wind directions) and water resources (e.g., groundwater vulnerability). Identify
safe distances between the plant area, especially the storage tank farms, and the community
areas;
 Identify prevention and mitigation measures required to avoid or minimize community
hazards
 Develop an Emergency Management Plan with the participation of local authorities and
potentially affected communities

2.4.
Social Issues
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘
3. Performance Indicators and Monitoring
3.1.
Air Emissions Standards for Nitrogen Fertilizer Manufacturing plants
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Ammonia Plants
NOX
mg/Nm3
300
No national standards specific to fertilizer
sector
NH3
mg/Nm3
50
PM
mg/Nm3
50
150
Nitric Acid Plants
NOX
mg/Nm3
200
No national standards specific to fertilizer
sector
N2O
mg/Nm3
800
NH3
mg/Nm3
10
PM
mg/Nm3
50
150
Urea / UAN Plants
Urea
(prilling/granulation)

mg/Nm3

50
150 dry de dusting, 50 wet de dusting and
new plant
NH3
(prilling/granulation)
mg/Nm3
50
No national standards specific to fertilizer
sector
PM
mg/Nm3
50
150
AN / CAN Plants
PM
mg/Nm3
50
150
NH3
mg/Nm3
50
No national standards specific to fertilizer
sector

3.2.
Effluents Levels for Nitrogenous Fertilizers Manufacturing plants
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Value
GIIP
National Standards
pH
S.U.
6-9
6 – 9

--- Page 109 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

107
(across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface
water, public sewer and irrigated land)
Temperature
Increase
No national standards specific to fertilizer sector
Ammonia Plant
NH3
mg/l
No national standards specific to fertilizer sector
Total nitrogen
mg/l
15
100 (old); 250 (new)
TSS
mg/l
30
150 (inland surface water), 500 (public sewer),
200 (irrigated land)
Nitric Acid Plants
NH3
mg/l
No national standards specific to fertilizer sector
Total Nitrogen
mg/l
15
100 (old); 50 (new)
TSS
mg/l
30
150 (inland surface water), 500 (public sewer),
200 (irrigated land)
Urea Plants
Urea
(prilling/granulation)
mg
urea/l
No national standards specific to fertilizer sector
NH3
(prilling/granulation)
mg/l
AN / CAN Plants
AN
mg/l
100
No national standards specific to fertilizer sector
NH3
mg/l
Total Nitrogen
mg/l
15
100 (old); 250 (new)
TSS
mg/l
30
150 (inland surface water), 500 (public sewer),
200 (irrigated land)
* Please note that not all the parameters of the National Standards are specific to Nitrogenous fertilizer sector. The
national standards are defined as per the location of disposal – inland surface water; public sewer; irrigated land. For
ease of comparison, here the national standards are given as range and not as per the location of disposal. In addition
to the above mentioned pollutants, there are other pollutants as well for which standards are specified.

3.3.
Air Emissions Standards of Phosphate Fertilizers Manufacturing plants
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Phosphoric Acid Plants
Fluorides
(gaseous) as HF
mg/Nm3
25
Particulate
Matter
mg/Nm3
50
150
Phosphate Fertilizer Plants
Fluorides
(gaseous) as HF
mg/Nm3
25
Particulate
Matter
mg/Nm3
50
No National standards specific to
fertilizer sector
Ammonia

mg/Nm3
50
No National standards specific to
fertilizer sector

HCL
mg/Nm3
30
NOX
mg/Nm3
500 Nitro-phosphate unit
70 mix acid unit
* Please note that not all the parameters of the National Standards are specific to Phosphate Fertilizer Manufacturing.

--- Page 110 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

108
3.4.
Effluents Levels for Phosphate Fertilizers Manufacturing plants
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
pH
S.U
6-9
6 – 9
(across all discharge locations, i.e. inland surface
water, public sewer and irrigated land)
Total
Phosphorus
mg/L
Fluorides
mg/L
20
10 at the exhaust of Fluoride removal
plant (as F)
kg/ton NPK
0.03
No National standards specific to fertilizer sector
kg/ton
Phosphorus
Oxide
(P2O5) kg/ton

No National standards specific to fertilizer sector
TSS
mg/L
50
150 (inland surface water), 500 (public sewer),
200 (irrigated land)
Cadmium
mg/L
0.1
No National standards specific to fertilizer sector

Total
Nitrogen
mg/L
15
Ammonia
mg/L
10
Total
Metals
mg/L
10
* Please note that not all the parameters of the National Standards are specific to Phosphatic fertilizer sector. The
national standards are defined as per the location of disposal – inland surface water; public sewer; irrigated land. For
ease of comparison, here the national standards are given as range and not as per the location of disposal. In addition
to the above mentioned pollutants, there are other pollutants as well for which standards are specified.

3.5.
Resource and energy Consumption/Generation for Phosphate Fertilizer
Manufacturing
Pollutants
Unit
Industry Benchmark
Phosphoric
Acid
Ton phosphate
rock/ton P2O5
2.6-3.5a
Ton H2SO4/ton P2O5
2.1-2.3 a
KWh/ton P2O5
120-180 a
m3 cooling water/ton
P2O5
100-150 a
NPK Plant A
KWh/ton NPK
30-33 a,b
Total energy for drying
MJ/ton NPK
300-320 a,b
NPK Plant B
KWh/ton NPK
50 a,b
Total energy for drying
MJ/ton NPK
450 a,b

NPK Plant C

KWh/ton NPK
50-109 b
m3 cooling water/ton
NPK
17 b
Ton CO2 required/ton
P2O5
1 a,b

SSP
KWh/ton SSP
19-34 b

--- Page 111 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

109
m3 water/ton SSP
0.1-2 b
3.6.
Resource and energy consumption/generation in Nitrogenous fertilizer production
Pollutants
Unit
Industry Benchmark
Ammonia
GJ lower heating value
(LHV)/ton NH3
28.4 to 32.0 a

Urea
GJ/ton urea
0.4-0.45 a,b
AN/CAN
KWh/ ton AN/CAN
25-60/10-50 a,b
kg Steam/ton AN/CAN
0-50/150-200 a
Nitric Acid(Energy Generation)
GJ/ton HNO3 (100%)
2.4 – 1.6 b
(BAT –Average)
3.7.
Social standards
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘.

4. General Description of Industry Activities
Sector Activity
Sub-sector Activities
Nitrogenous fertilizers
Ammonia
Ammonia production from natural gas includes the following process
steps: removal of trace quantities of sulfur in the feedstock; primary and
secondary reforming, carbon monoxide shift conversion, removal of
carbon dioxide, methanation, compression, ammonia synthesis, and
ammonia product refrigeration. Carbon is removed in the form of
concentrated CO2, which can be used for urea manufacture or other
industrial purposes to reduce its release to the atmosphere. Another form
of ammonia production is through partial oxidation of heavy fuel oil or
vacuum residue. Two other nonconventional processes include:
 Addition of extra process air to the secondary reformer with
cryogenic removal of the excess nitrogen.
Heat-exchange auto-thermal reforming.
Urea
The synthesis of urea involves the combination of ammonia and carbon
dioxide at high pressure to form ammonium carbamate, which is
subsequently dehydrated by the application of heat to form urea and
water. The first step is fast and exothermic and essentially goes to
completion under reaction conditions used Industrially. The second step
is slower and endothermic, and does not go to completion. Conversion
(on a CO2 basis) is usually in the order of 50-80 percent and increases
with increasing temperature and NH3/CO2 ratio.
Nitric Acid
The production stages for nitric acid manufacture include the following:
vaporizing liquid ammonia; mixing the vapour with air and burning the
mixture over a platinum/rhodium catalyst; cooling the resulting nitric
oxide (NO) and oxidizing it to nitrogen dioxide (NO2) with residual
oxygen; and absorbing the nitrogen dioxide in water in an absorption
column to form nitric acid.
Ammonium
Nitrate
(AN)
and
Calcium
Ammonium
Nitrate (CAN)
Ammonium nitrate is produced by the reaction between gaseous
ammonia and aqueous nitric acid. The production process comprises
three main unit operations: neutralization, evaporation, and solidification
(prilling and granulation).
Ammonium Sulphate
The main volumes of ammonium sulfate are produced as a by-product
from caprolactam, acrylonitrile, SO2 abatement, and coke production

--- Page 112 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

110
Phosphatic/ Compound fertilizers
Phosphoric acid
Phosphoric acid (H3PO4) is primarily used in the manufacture of
phosphate salts.
Two different processes can be used in the manufacture of phosphoric
acid
 Thermal Process
 Wet Process
Sulphuric acid
Sulfuric acid (H2SO4) is used in the phosphate fertilizer industry for the
production of phosphoric acid. Sulfuric acid is manufactured mainly
from sulfur dioxide (SO2), produced through the combustion of
elemental sulfur. The exothermic oxidation of sulfur dioxide over
several layers of a suitable catalyst (e.g. vanadium pentoxide) to produce
sulfur trioxide
(SO3) is the most common process in sulfuric acid manufacturing plants.
Compound
Fertilizers(NPK)
Compound fertilizers are a large group of products, varying based on the
particular nitrogen / phosphorus / potassium (N/P/K) ratios. Production
processes are also numerous and product types include PK, NP (e.g.
DAP), NK and NPK. This can be achieved by using two different routes,
namely production by the nitro-phosphate route, and production by the
mixed acid route
Phosphate
Fertilizers
(SSP / TSP)
Phosphate fertilizers are produced by adding acid to ground or
pulverized phosphate rock. If sulfuric acid is used, single or normal,
superphosphate (SSP) is produced, with a phosphorus content of 16–21
percent as phosphorous pentoxide (P2O5).SSP production involves
mixing the sulfuric acid and the rock in a reactor. The reaction mixture is
discharged onto a slow moving conveyor belt. If the reaction The
mixture is directly fed to a granulator, the process is the so called
―direct‖ granulation. In ―indirect‖ granulation, the reaction mixture is
stored for ―curing‖ for 4 to 6 weeks before bagging and then granulated.

--- Page 113 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

111
18.6. ESRM Guidance Note for Pharmaceutical Sector

1. Introduction
The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM for the Pharmaceutical Sector is to provide a high
level indicative summary of potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and performance levels
for transactions in the Pharmaceutical sector in Bangladesh. The scope of application will be fully
aligned with the Section 4 of Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and FIs. At all times, applicable
national regulations are to be followed. Where national regulations differ from the levels and
measures presented in this Guidance Note, loan proposals are expected to achieve whichever is
more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those provided in this Guidance Note are
appropriate, in view of specific loan proposal, a full and detailed justification for any proposed
alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This justification should
demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of human health and
the environment. For the purposes of this Guidance Note, Pharmaceuticals sector activities include,
but are not limited to: 1.Primary manufacturing of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs), 2.
Formulation, mixing and compounding of API intermediaries.

2. Industry Specific Impacts and Management

2.1.
Environmental Issues:
 Air emissions
Both gaseous organic and inorganic compounds, as well as particulates, may be emitted during
pharmaceutical manufacturing and formulation from both point sources and fugitive emissions in
addition to Greenhouse Gas emissions. Some of the volatile organic compounds (VOC) and
inorganic gases that are emitted are classified as hazardous air pollutants (HAPs).
Bulk Manufacturing: The industry manufactures most bulk pharmaceutical substances and
intermediates in campaigns via batch processes. Following the completion of one campaign,
another bulk substance or intermediate is typically made using the same equipment (e.g., reactors,
filters, dryers). The reactants and solvents used in manufacturing the next bulk substance or
intermediate may vary greatly from the ones previously used. While some reactions may require the
use of halogenated solvents, the next reaction may use another solvent or no solvent at all.
Chemical synthesis and extraction process result significant emissions of volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) which are generated from reactor vents, filtering systems in the separation
process, solvent vapours from purification tanks and dryers (including loading and unloading
operations), fugitive emissions from valves, tanks, pumps, and other equipment (e.g., centrifuges),
solvents and other VOCs related to extraction chemicals in natural product extraction, pre-
fermentation and fermentation solvents, and wastewater collection and treatment units.
Formulation: During mixing, compounding, formulation, and packaging steps, both particulate
matter and VOCs may be emitted and as these compounds may pose a danger to workers, through
direct inhalation they are a principal concern. Depending on the process and the batch record
requirements, the particulates (e.g., tablet dusts) may be recycled back into the formulation process.
However, sometimes the particulates are collected for destruction or disposal.
The following measures can be taken to mitigate VOC emissions:

--- Page 114 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

112
 Reducing or substituting the use of solvents and other materials which have a high VOC
content, and substitution with products that have lower volatilities, and switching to aqueous-
based coating films and aqueous-based cleaning solutions. Implementation of VOC leak
prevention, detection and control strategies from operating equipment (as for e.g. equipment
modifications could include seal less pumps or closed vent system or dual mechanical seal
with barrier fluid maintained at a higher pressure than the pumped fluid etc.
 Implementation of VOC loss prevention and control strategies in open vats and mixing
processes including installation of process condensers after the process equipment to support a
vapor-to-liquid phase change and to recover solvents
 Collection of vapors (e.g., from sterilization chambers, reactors, distillation units) through
air extractors / ventilation hoods and subsequent treatment of gas stream by removing VOCs
with control devices such as condensers, activated carbon absorption, catalytic converters /
incinerators, and wet scrubbers (or gas absorbers)
 Reduction of equipment operating temperatures, where possible
 For drying operations, adoption of closed circuits under a Nitrogen atmosphere
 Use of closed-loop liquid and gas collection equipment for cleaning of reactors and other
equipment.
The following measures can be taken to mitigate particulate emissions:
 Collection with air filtration units and recycling of particulate matter into the formulation
process (e.g. tablet dust), depending on batch record requirements and on process
characteristics
 Installation of dedicated filtration systems (sometimes double stages of filtration) in
granulation equipment. An abatement room should be also provided where the particulate is
removed from the air, decreasing flow speed
 Installation of high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters in the heating, ventilating and
air conditioning (HVAC) systems;
 Segregation of air ducts to prevent air cross-contamination from different processes and to
ease the air stream treatment;
 Installation of dedicated air filtration units typically bag house/fabric filters;
 Depending on the volume of emissions and prevailing size of particulate matter, use of
additional particulate emissions control methods, such as wet scrubbing and wet electrostatic
precipitators, especially after combustion / thermal oxidation treatments
Combustion sources emissions: Exhaust gas emissions produced by the combustion of gas or
diesel in turbines, boilers, compressors, pumps and other engines for power and heat generation, are
a significant source of air emissions from pharmaceuticals manufacturing facilities. Guidance for
the management of small combustion source emissions with a capacity of up to 50 megawatt
thermal (MWth), including air emission standards for exhaust emissions.
Odours: The main source of odour emissions is typically associated with fermentation activities.
Recommended odour management strategies include:
 Considering the location of new facilities, taking into account proper distances to
neighbours and the propagation of odours
 Post-combustion of venting gases
 Use of exhaust stack heights that are consistent with practices as described in the General
EHS Guidelines
 Use of wet scrubbers to remove odours with a high affinity to water

--- Page 115 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

113
 Condensation of vapours combined with scrubbers
 Wastewater
Water is used for both process and non-process purposes in a pharmaceutical manufacturing
facility. Process wastewater includes water that was used or formed during the reaction, water used
to clean process equipment and floors, and pump seal water etc. Non-process wastewater includes
noncontact cooling water (e.g., used in heat exchangers), noncontact ancillary water (e.g., boiler
blow-down, bottle washing), sanitary wastewater, and wastewater from other sources (e.g., storm
water runoff). The use, discharge pattern and characteristics of the wastewater will differ according
to the type of operations conducted at the facility. Water is also formed as a part of a chemical
reaction in some of the processes. The waste water to be generated from bulk manufacturing may
include streams such as chemical reactions streams, spent acid, caustic, condensed steam from
sterilization and strippers, scrubber blow-down and equipment and vessel wash water. While waste
water to be generated from formulation may include streams such as equipment and vessel wash
water, condensed steam from sterilization and strippers, scrubber blow-down etc.The main
conventional pollutants of concern in these wastewater streams are parameters such as biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), Total Suspended Solids (TSS),
Ammonia, Toxicity, Biodegradability, and pH. Other chemical compounds may also be present
including, but not limited to, solvents, organic acids, organic halides, inorganic acids, ammonia,
cyanide, toluene, and active pharmaceutical ingredients (API).Measures to reduce the generation of
wastewater at source include adoption of biodegradable materials where possible (e.g., tablet
coating), recovering aqueous ammonia and solvents from the waste stream, and combining solvent
waste streams can help in reducing the pollutants load in wastewater. Industrial Process
Wastewater treatment measures include:
 Grease traps, skimmers, dissolved air floatation or oil water separators for separation of
oils and floatable solids
 Filtration for separation of filterable solids
 Flow and load equalization
 Sedimentation for suspended solids reduction using clarifiers
 Biological treatment, typically aerobic treatment, for reduction of soluble organic matter
(BOD)
 Biological nutrient removal for reduction in nitrogen and phosphorus
 Chlorination of effluent when disinfection is required
 Dewatering and disposal of residuals in designated hazardous waste landfills
 Additional engineering controls may be required for:
 Containment and treatment of volatile organics stripped from various unit operations in
the wastewater treatment system
 Advanced metals removal using membrane filtration or other physical/chemical treatment
technologies
 Removal of recalcitrant organics and active ingredients using activated carbon or
advanced chemical oxidation
 Residual colour removal using adsorption or chemical oxidation
 Reduction in effluent toxicity using appropriate technology (such as reverse osmosis, ion
exchange, activated carbon, etc.)
 Reduction in TDS in the effluent using reverse osmosis or evaporation
 Containment and neutralization of nuisance odours.

--- Page 116 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

114
 Solid waste
In general primary pharmaceutical manufacturing process especially natural product extraction and
fermentation are typically characterized by low ratio of finished products to raw material, resulting
in significant quantities of residual waste. Both non-hazardous and hazardous wastes are generated
which can include off-spec or obsolete raw materials or products, spent solvents, reaction residues,
used filter media, still bottoms, used chemical reagents, dusts from filtration or air pollution control
equipment, raw material packaging wastes, laboratory wastes, spills, as well as wastes generated
during packaging of the formulated product. Filter cakes and spent raw materials (plants, roots,
animal tissues etc.) from fermentation and natural product extraction are two of the largest sources
of residual wastes in the pharmaceutical industry. A number of practices are implemented by the
industry to reduce waste generation and material losses. Typical practices include process
optimization, production scheduling, materials tracking and inventory control, special material
handling and storage procedures, preventive maintenance programs, material substitution (e.g. use
of water based solvents etc), spent solvent recycling & reuse and waste stream segregation.
Residual wastes should be segregated as hazardous and non-hazardous wastes and managed/
disposed in accordance with national regulations and licensed waste management facilities.
Potentially pathogenic waste from biotechnology manufacturing should be inactivated through
sterilization or chemical treatment before final disposal. The typical material inputs and potential
releases during various steps in pharmaceutical manufacturing are summarized in the table below:
Table - Summary of typical material inputs and pollution outputs in the Pharmaceutical
industry
Process
Air Emissions
Wastewater
Residual Solid Wastes
Chemical
Synthesis
Reaction
VOC emissions from
reactor vents, manways,
material
loading
and
unloading, acid gases
(halogen acids, sulfur
dioxide, nitrous oxides);
fugitive emissions, from
pumps,
sample
collections,
valves,
tanks etc
Process
waste
waters
with
spent
solvents,
catalysts,
reactants;
pump seal waters, wet
scrubber
wastewater;
equipment
cleaning
wastewater etc
Reaction residues and
reactor bottom wastes.
Separation
VOC emissions from
filtering systems which
aren‘t contained; and
fugitive emissions from
valves,
tanks
and
centrifuges etc
Equipment
cleaning
wash
waters,
spills,
leaks, spent separation
solvents.
Purification
Solvent
vapors
from
purification
tanks;
fugitive emissions etc.
Equipment
cleaning
wash
waters,
spills,
leaks, spent purification
solvents.
Drying
VOC emissions from
manual
loading
and
unloading of dryers
Equipment
cleaning
wash waters, spills, leaks
etc

--- Page 117 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

115
Natural
Product
Extraction
Solvent
vapors
VOC‘s
from
extraction
chemicals
Equipment
cleaning
wash
water,
spent
solvents
(ammonia);
natural
product
extraction wastewater.
Spent raw materials
(plants, roots etc.)
Fermentation
Odoriferous
gases,
extraction
solvent
vapors, particulates
Spent fermenter broth,
Fermentation wastewater
containing
sugars,
starches, nutrients, etc.;
Waste
filter
cake,
fermentation residues
Formulation
Dusts
Equipment
cleaning
wash
waters
(spent
solvents), spills, leaks;
wash
waters;
rejected
liquid products such as
syrups, injections etc
Particulates,
Waste
packaging,
rejected
solid products such as
tablets,
capsules etc.
Utilities
(water
and
waste water treatment)
Rejected
water;
back
wash water; blowdowns
etc
Sludge
from
water
treatment
plant;
effluent
treatment
plant;
sewerage
treatment plant etc
 Hazardous Materials Management
Pharmaceutical ingredient manufacturing plants should assess the risks associated with the use and
handling of hazardous materials and implement practices to prevent and minimize such risks. The
application of these management practices should be documented in a written Hazardous Materials
Management Plan. The purpose of this plan is to establish and implement a systematic set of
preventive actions against accidental releases of substances that can cause serious harm to the
environment, and to health and safety or workers and the public from short-term exposures and to
mitigate the severity of releases that do occur. In establishing the hazardous material management
plan facilities should:
 Conduct a Hazard Assessment considering accident history in the last five years, worst
case scenario, and alternative release analysis
 Identify and implement management procedures including process safety, training,
management of change, incident investigation, employee participation, contractor training and
oversight
 Implement prevention measures including process hazard analysis, operating procedures,
mechanical integrity, prestart review, work permit, and compliance audits
 Develop and implement an Emergency Response Program including emergency response
procedures, emergency equipment, training, review and updates.
 Threats to biodiversity
Bioprospecting - The process of collection of genetic resources (bioprospecting), which may be part
of certain pharmaceutical projects, may include access to different types of habitats. In addition to
the potential for negative impacts to the biodiversity of these habitats, which may also depend on
the physical nature of the collection activities and the types of genetic material involved,
bioprospecting may also raise issue about the rights of local communities to consent in the use or to
a share in the benefits of the commercialization of their cultural heritage or the genetic resources
extracted.

--- Page 118 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

116
Recommended management practices include:
 Avoiding or minimizing harm to biodiversity in compliance with applicable legal
requirements
 Development and application of bio prospecting procedures that are consistent with
internationally recognized standards and guidelines, including aspects of:
o Coordination with representatives from the National Focal Point prior to the
undertaking of bio prospecting activities to identify national and local requirements
o Obtaining Prior Informed Consent (PIC) from the State which is party to the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in material screened for genetic use
according to the basic principle of the CBD and Development and implementation of
contracting agreements for the sharing of benefits arising from the development and
commercialization of genetic resources.
Bio-safety - For projects or facilities involved in research, manufacture, or trading of living
modified organisms, the risks associated with their production, handling, storage, transport, and use
may include threats to biological diversity due to the controlled or uncontrolled release of the
organism into the environment. Recommended bio-safety management practices include:
 Development of a risk-based approach to the identification of key control points in the
process cycle, including in-plant handling, off-site transport, and use of modified organisms.
 Implementation of in-plant and transport safety measures including specialized training of
personnel, primary containment (e.g. containment barriers) and secondary containment (e.g.
airlocks, differential pressure, exhaust air filters and treatment of contaminated material and
wastes).
 Preparation and implementation of Transportation Safety Plans specific to the type of
organism being handled and consistent with the objectives of applicable international
conventions and treaties.
 Implementation of risk-management measures for controlled releases applicable to the
specific organism including, as appropriate, training of those involved, monitoring of the
activity, controlling access to the site, and application of isolation methods.
 Bioethics
The ethical issues faced by the pharmaceutical or biotechnology industry are potentially complex
and depend significantly on the activity of the company. These issues may include the development
of genetically modified foods; gene therapy experiments and stem cell research; human participant
trials; animal testing; handling of genetic information; sale of genetic and biological samples; and
the creation of transgenic animals, among others.
Recommended bioethics management approaches include:
 Well established ethics mechanisms including management commitment; dedicated
internal ethics personnel; access and use of external expertise (e.g. consultants and advisory
boards); internal training and accountability mechanisms; communications programs to
engage with suppliers and external stakeholders; and evaluation and reporting mechanisms.
 Adherence to internationally accepted ethical principles applicable to genetic research,
clinical trials involving human participants, and any other activities with critical bioethical
issues
 The use of animals for experimental and scientific purposes should be conducted
according to industry good practice which includes reduction of the numbers of animals used
in each study to the absolute minimum necessary to obtain valid results and refinement of the

--- Page 119 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

117
use of research animals to use less painful or the least invasive procedures whenever possible.
Animal breeding, husbandry, and care facilities of the company or its suppliers should be
designed and operated according to internationally certifiable methodologies.

2.2.
Health and Safety issues:
Table - Common Structural, Fire & Electrical Safety Issues in Bangladesh
Area
Issues commonly observed
Prevention and Mitigation Measures
Structural Highly
stressed
columns;
undocumented
vertical
extensions; localised areas of
high
loads
in
buildings;
discrepancy
between
structural drawing and built
structure; minor to major
cracks in structural elements.
 Compliance to regulatory requirements including
the Bangladesh National Building Code (BNBC)
(2015) or international codes, such as those
compiled by the International Code Council
(ICC), (2006).
 Undertake periodic structural safety audits by
accredited agencies.
Fire
Inadequate,
untested
fire
alarms;
inadequate
exit
capacity compared to the
occupancy load; lack of exit
signage.
 Compliance with the by-laws of the Fire
Regulation (2014), part of the Bangladesh Labor
(Amendment) Act (2013), which includes
requirements regarding the formation of a safety
committees, and other measures such as
emergency exits, access to stairs, and provision
of personal protective equipment (PPE).
 Provisions for fire hydrants as per the
requirements of BNBC (2015) and by Fire
Regulation
2014,
including
water
supply
specifications
according
to
the
building
size/hazard.
 Undertake regular fire audits by accredited
agencies, with mock drills to be conducted on a
periodic basis as per the fire hazard assessment
of the facility.
Electrical
Unsealed entry and exit points
for electrical cable; excessive
dust deposit on cables; cables
laid
on
floor
without
guarding/protection; oil leaks
in generator room; inadequate
cable grounding.
 Undertake electrical safety assessment on a
periodic basis, and ensure workers are trained
and provided with appropriate PPE based on the
risk assessment.
Process safety programs should be implemented, due to industry-specific characteristics, including
complex chemical reactions, use of hazardous materials (e.g., toxic and reactive materials, and
flammable or explosive compounds) and multistep reactions. Process safety management
includes the following actions:
 Physical hazard testing of materials and reactions

--- Page 120 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

118
 Hazard analysis studies to review the process chemistry and engineering practices,
including thermodynamics and kinetics
 Examination of preventive maintenance and mechanical integrity of the process
equipment and utilities
 Worker training
 Development of operating instructions and emergency response procedures.
Workers may be exposed to drug substances by inadvertently breathing airborne dust or vapours or
accidentally swallowing contaminated foods or beverages. Occupational Exposure Limits (OELs)
are developed by toxicologists and occupational hygienists to provide guidance on limiting worker
exposures to drug substances.
Table - Common Occupational Health Issues
Hazard
Description
Mitigation Measures
Chemical
Acute and chronic health
risks may result from
worker
exposures
to
hazardous
chemicals
during
synthesis
operations.

Chemicals
with
acute
health effects can damage
the eyes and skin, be
corrosive or irritating to
body
tissues,
cause
sensitization or allergic
reactions
or
be
asphyxiants,
causing
suffocation
or
oxygen
deficiency.


 Provision
of
adequate
Personal
Protective
Equipments
(PPEs)
like
facemasks
with
appropriate filters for air purification (chemicals,
mists, vapors and gases), safety shoes and boots
for protection against corrosive chemicals etc.
and toxic gas detection systems with alarms
 Use of partitioned workplace areas with good
dilution ventilation and/or differential air pressures
 When toxic materials are handled, laminar
ventilation hoods or isolation devices should be
installed;
 Manufacturing areas should be equipped with
suitable heating ventilation and air conditioning
(HVAC) systems including use of high efficiency
particulate air (HEPA) filters in ventilation
systems,
particularly
in
sterile
product
manufacturing areas;
 Use of local exhaust ventilation (LEV) with
flanged inlets to capture fugitive dusts and vapors
released at open transfer points
 Conducting liquid transfer, liquid separation, solid
and liquid filtration, granulation, drying, milling,
blending, and compression in work areas with
good dilution and LEV
 Enclosing of granulators, dryers, mills, and
blenders, and venting to air-control devices
 Fire and explosion hazards may arise during
solvent extractions. Preventive measures such as -
Storage of incompatible materials (acids, bases,
flammables, oxidizers, reactive chemicals) in
separate areas and with containment facilities;
provision
of
material-specific
storage
for

--- Page 121 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

119
extremely hazardous or reactive materials; use of
flame arresting devices on vents from flammable
storage containers; provision of grounding and
lightning protection for tank farms, transfer
stations, and other equipment that handles
flammable materials; selection of materials of
construction compatible with products stored for
all parts of storage and delivery systems, and
avoiding reuse of tanks for different products
without checking material compatibility should be
considered.
Physical
Worker
safety
hazards
may be posed by moving
machine
parts
and
equipment; high pressure
steam, hot water, heated
surfaces
and
hot
workplace environment
High noise levels may be
generated
by
manufacturing equipment
and
utilities
(e.g.,
compressed air, vacuum
sources,
ventilation
systems,
manufacturing
activities,
electricity
generator etc).

 Steam and thermal fluid pipelines should be
insulated, marked, and regularly inspected
 Steam vents and pressure release valves should be
directed away from areas where workers have
access
 High temperature areas of presses should be
screened to prevent ingress of body parts.
 Use of noise control techniques such as: using
acoustic machine enclosures; selecting structures
according to their noise isolation effect to envelop
the building; using mufflers or silencers in intake
and exhaust channels; using sound absorptive
materials in walls and ceilings; using vibration
isolators and flexible connections (e.g., helical
steel springs and rubber elements); applying a
carefully detailed design to prevent possible noise
leakage through openings or to minimize pressure
variations in piping
Pathogenic
& biological
Exposure
to pathogens
may
occur
during
isolation and growth of
micro-organisms
in
laboratory
and
in
fermentation processes.
 Use of any harmful biological agents should be
avoided and replaced with an agent that, under
normal conditions of use, is not dangerous or less
dangerous to workers
 Work processes, engineering, and administrative
controls should be designed, maintained, and
operated to avoid or minimize release of biological
agents into the working environment. The number
of employees exposed or likely to become exposed
should be kept at a minimum.
 Review and assess known and suspected presence
of biological agents at the place of work and
implement
appropriate
safety
measures,
monitoring, training, and training verification
programs.

--- Page 122 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

120
 Measures to eliminate and control hazards from
known and suspected biological agents at the place
of work should be designed, implemented and
maintained in close co-operation with the local
health authorities and according to recognized
International standards.
Radiological Research
and
development
operations
may include the use of
radiological
materials
which should be managed
to prevent and control
worker
exposures
according
to
licensing
requirements.
 Places of work involving occupational and/or
natural exposure to ionizing radiation should be
established and operated in accordance with
recognized international safety standards and
guidelines.
 Exposure to non-ionizing radiation (including
static
magnetic
fields;
sub-radio
frequency
magnetic fields; static electric fields; radio
frequency and microwave radiation; light and near-
infrared radiation; and ultraviolet radiation) should
be controlled to internationally recommended
limits.

2.3.
Community Health & Safety:
The common health and safety impacts on the community during the construction, operation, and
decommissioning of pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities are:
 Noise, vibration, dust creation, traffic movement, road safety, emissions and air quality,
fire, explosion & toxic hazards due to accidental release of chemicals and waste water
discharge
 Strain on transport networks and local infrastructure - disruption to road users both
pedestrian and other vehicles
The common health and safety impacts on the community during the construction, operation, and
decommissioning of tanneries include:

Table - Community health & safety impacts and mitigation measures
Risk
of
road
accidents during
transportation of
materials

Traffic safety:
 Road safety measures like emphasizing safety aspects among drivers,
improving driving skills and requiring licensing of drivers, adopting limits
for trip duration and arranging driver rosters to avoid overtiredness, use of
speed control devices (governors) on trucks and remote monitoring of
driver actions
Transportation of hazardous materials:
 To ensure compliance with local laws and international requirements
applicable to the transport of hazardous materials (Hazmats)
 Standard operating procedures for transportation of Hazmats - proper
labelling of containers, shipping manifest, ensuring adequate transport
vehicle specifications, , use of labelling and placarding (external signs on
transport vehicles)

--- Page 123 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

121
 Training of employees in shipping procedures and emergency procedures
Respiratory
problems arising
out of exposure
to dust and other
gaseous
emissions

 Inclusion of buffer strips or other methods of physical separation around
project sites to protect the public from major hazards associated with
hazardous materials incidents or process failure
 Modifying process or storage conditions to reduce the potential
consequences of an accidental off-site release. Provisions to alert the
public, provide for evacuation of surrounding areas, establish safety zones
around a site, and ensure the provision of emergency medical services to
the public
 Improving shut-down and secondary containment to reduce the amount of
material escaping from containment and to reduce the release duration
 Reducing the probability that releases will occur through improved site
operations and control and through improvements in maintenance and
inspection
Risk of fire and
structural
damage

 Fire prevention measures such as fuel load & control of combustibles,
ignition sources, interior finish flame spread characteristics, interior finish
smoke production characteristics, human acts, and housekeeping and
maintenance
 Fire suppression system – fire hydrants
 Emergency response plan to assist staff and emergency response teams
during real life emergency and training exercises
Noise pollution

 Noise monitoring may be carried out for the purposes of establishing the
existing ambient noise
 Limiting the hours of operation for specific pieces of equipment or
operations, especially mobile sources operating through community areas
 Improving the acoustic performance of constructed
 Installing vibration isolation for mechanical equipment
 Re-locating noise sources to less sensitive areas to take advantage of
distance and shielding buildings, apply sound insulation

2.4.
Social Issues:
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘

3. Performance Indicators and Monitoring

3.1.
Wastewater discharge quality standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
pH
6 – 9
6-9 (across all locations)
BOD
mg/L
30
50 (Inland surface water), 250 (Public Sewerage
system connected to treatment at second stage), 100
(Irrigated land)
COD
mg/L
150
200 (Inland surface water), 400 (Public Sewerage
system connected, to treatment at second stage), 400

--- Page 124 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

122
(Irrigated land)
TSS
mg/L
10
150 (Inland surface water), 500 (Public Sewerage
system connected to treatment at second stage), 200
(Irrigated land)
Oil and Grease
mg/L
10
10 (Inland surface water), 20 (Public
Seweragesystem connectedto treatment atsecond
stage), 10 (Irrigated land)
Cadmium
mg/L
0.1
0.50 (Inland surface water), 0.05 (Public Sewerage
system connected to treatment at second stage), 0.05
(Irrigated land)
Chromium (hexavalent)
mg/L
0.1
0.1 (Inland surface water), 1.0 (Public Sewerage
system connected to treatment at second stage), 1.0
(Irrigated land)
Mercury
mg/L
0.01
0.01 (across all locations)
Active ingredient (each)
mg/L
0.05
NA
Total nitrogen
mg/L
10
50 (Inland surface water), 75 (Public Sewerage
system connected to treatment at second stage), 75
(Irrigated land)
Ketone
mg/L
0.2
NA
Benzene
mg/L
0.02
NA
Ammonia
mg/L
30
5 (Inland surface water), 5 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage), 15 (Irrigated
land)
Total nitrogen
mg/L
10
100 (across all locations)
Total phosphorus
mg/L
8 (Inland surface water), 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage),15 (Irrigated
land)
Ketones (each)(1)
mg/L
0.2
NA
Acetonitrile
mg/L
10.2
Acetates (each)(2)
mg/L
0.5
Benzene
mg/L
0.02
Chlorobenzene
mg/L
0.06
Chloroform
mg/L
0.013
o-Dichlorobenzene
mg/L
0.06
1,2-Dichloroethane
mg/L
0.1
Amines (each)(3)
mg/L
102
Dimethyl sulfoxide
mg/L
37.5
Methanol / ethanol
(each)
mg/L
4.1
n-Heptane
mg/L
0.02
n-Hexane
mg/L
0.02
Isobutyraldehyde
mg/L
0.5
Isopropanol
mg/L
1.6
Isopropyl ether
mg/L
2.6
Methyl cellosolve
mg/L
40.6
Methylene chloride
mg/L
0.3
Tetrahydrofuran
mg/L
2.6
Toulene
mg/L
0.02
Xylenes
mg/L
0.01
Bioassays 1. Toxicity T.U.(4)

--- Page 125 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

123
to fish
2. Toxicity
to
Daphnia
3. Toxicity
to algae
4. Toxicity
to
bacteria


16

* The National Standards are not specific to pharmaceutical sector and is applicable for all the industrial units. The
national standards are defined as per the location of disposal – inland surface water; public sewer; irrigated land. For
ease of comparison, here the national standards are given as range and not as per the location of disposal.

3.2.
Facility specific air emissions standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
Active Ingredient (each)
mg/Nm3
0.15
Particulate Matter
mg/Nm3
20
Total Organic Carbon
mg/Nm3
50
Hazardous Air Pollutants
kg/year
900 – 1800 (3)
Total Class A (1)
mg/Nm3
20 (4)
Total Class B (2)
mg/Nm3
80 (5)
Benzene, Vinyl Chloride,
Dichloroethane (each)
mg/Nm3
VOC
mg/Nm3
20-150 (6)
50 (7)
Bromides (as HBr)
mg/Sm3
Chlorides (as HCl)
mg/Sm3
30
Ammonia
mg/Sm3
30
Arsenic
mg/Sm3
0.05
Ethyene Oxide
mg/Sm3
0.5
Mutagenic Substance
mg/Sm3
0.05

3.3.
Acceptable Effective Dose Limits for Workplace Radiological Hazards
Exposure
Workers
(min.19 years of age)
Apprentices
And students
(16-18 years of age)
Five consecutive year average
– effective dose
20 mSv/year

Single year exposure
– effective dose
50 mSv/year
6 mSv/year
Equivalent dose to the lens of
the eye
150 mSv/year
50 mSv/year
Equivalent dose to the
extremities (hands, feet) or the skin
500 mSv/year
150 mSv/year

--- Page 126 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

124
3.4.
Social standards
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘.

4. General Description of Industry Activities
Manufacturing of Pharmaceuticals can be divided into two major production lines:
 The first step involves production of bulk substances i.e. production of active pharmaceutical
ingredients. Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) typically consist of organic molecules or
salts of such molecules that have been synthesized or extracted from natural ingredients. APIs
are subsequently used for production of medicinal products.
 The second and final step consists of formulation, mixing, compounding and packaging. Active
ingredients, produced during the primary manufacturing, are treated and modified into final
products. The products can have different forms like solids (e.g. tablets, coated or not and
capsules), liquids (e.g. solutions, emulsions, injectable), creams and ointments, or aerosols.
Sector Activity
Sub-sector Activities
Primary
manufacturing
Bulk pharmaceutical substances, normally crystalline solid salts, organic acids
or bases, containing an active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) are produced
through a chain of intermediary steps and precisely controlled reactions. These
substances are eventually used to produce formulated pharmaceutical products
which can be used in a dosage form. The formulated product can be
manufactured from bulk substances by processes such as Chemical synthesis;
Fermentation; Isolation/recovery from natural sources, or; a combination of
these processes
Formulation,
mixing
and
compounding of
API
intermediaries
The second and final step consists of formulation, mixing, compounding and
packaging. Active ingredients, produced during the primary manufacturing,
are treated and modified into final products. The products can have different
forms like solids (e.g. tablets, coated or not and capsules), liquids (e.g.
solutions, emulsions, injectable), creams and ointments, or aerosols.

--- Page 127 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

125
18.7. ESRM Guidance Note for Ship Breaking Sector


1. Introduction
The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM for the Ship Breaking Sector is to provide a high
level indicative summary of summary of potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and
performance levels for transactions in the Ship Breaking sector in Bangladesh. The scope of
application will be fully aligned with the Section 4 of Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and FIs. At
all times, applicable national regulations are to be followed. Where national regulations differ from
the levels and measures presented in this Guidance Note, loan proposals are expected to achieve
whichever is more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those provided in this
Guidance Note are appropriate, in view of specific loan proposal, a full and detailed justification for
any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This
justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of
human health and the environment.

2. Industry Specific Impacts and Management
2.1.
Environmental Issues:
The extraction of the ship structure and its components and parts, resulting in a flow of materials
for reuse, recycling and disposal, creates the potential of releases to the environment due to:
 Insufficiencies in preparatory procedures prior to the dismantling process
 Inability to collect/ remove/ secure on board substances of concern during dismantling
 Insufficiencies in procedures related to the collection, transport and storage/disposal of
substances
The nature of the operational procedures and the resulting flow of materials represent potential
releases to water, air and ground. In order to safeguard against this, it is necessary to consider all
steps in the decommissioning-for-disposal-process in order to allocate corrective actions at the
appropriate stages.
The decommissioning for disposal is a step by step process:
1. Decommissioning and sale
2. The dismantling process
3. Sorting for reuse, recycling and disposal
The key activities in ship decommissioning are:
1. Inventory of wastes - Prior to arrival, or alternatively on arrival at the dismantling facility, an
inventory survey of the vessel should be carried out. The survey will identify, quantify and
locate the types of wastes on board and will result in an inventory list of hazardous wastes and
other wastes. A thorough vessel survey can also be used for the purpose of planning the
sequence and nature of the work to be executed, for example, can asbestos-containing structures
be marked to facilitate the removal. Following the inventory of hazardous substances on-board
the ship, chemical safety data sheets should be made available for each of the hazardous
substances identified in the inventory. The requirements of the UN Globally Harmonized
System for the Classification and Labelling of Chemicals as well as the UN Recommendations
on Transport of Dangerous Goods should be followed concerning the labelling of hazardous
chemicals and their storage. Reference should also be made to the information on the ILO

--- Page 128 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

126
international instruments (Conventions, Recommendations, Codes of Practice) relevant to ship-
breaking operations, as well as on important information sources on chemical safety.
2. Removal/ cleaning– liquids, including fuels and oils - Prior to cutting, the ship should be
cleared of all residual materials. This may be carried out prior to step II or at a cleaning station
at the facility. Cleaning of, for example, cargo tanks, bunker and fuel tanks, bilge and ballast
compartments, sewage tanks, etc. should be performed in order to ensure that the ship is
presented for dismantling in a clean and safe condition. Wastewater and any used solvents from
the cleaning station must be contained and properly treated. All combustible liquids and
materials are removed to make the vessel safe for hot work. This process will continue during
the entire dismantling process (see next section). During removal, actions should include
containment; whilst wet - booms should be placed around the ship, when dry – transfer
arrangements (pumping/ pipe-work, etc.) should include arrangements for the containment of
any leakage.
3. Securing - To ensure that working procedures and operations are undertaken in a safe manner, a
process of securing the vessel is required. This should emphasis two aspects:
 Safe access to all areas, compartments, tanks, etc. ensuring breathable atmospheres
 Safe conditions for hot work, including cleaning/ venting, removal of toxic or highly
flammable paints from areas to be cut, and testing/ monitoring before any hot work is
performed
4. Removal of equipment -Consumable and loose equipment is removed first. Reusable
components are removed as they become accessible. Fixtures, anchors, chains, engine parts and
propellers are examples of components that are removed during this step.
5. Removal of hazardous/ polluting substances - The pre-prepared inventory identifies
hazardous/polluting substances (asbestos-containing material, PCB-containing material, etc).
These are carefully removed and disposed of as they become accessible. In cases where these
substances are encased or enclosed in components or structural parts, removal can take place
after these have been brought ashore.
6. Dismantling -A safe and practical cutting sequence is dependent upon which adopted method is
used (dry-dock, moored, beached). A specific plan for an actual dismantling facility should be
drawn up. This should form a base frame for the ship-specific dismantling plan.
7. Storage, recycling and disposal -The waste stream arriving from dismantling is sorted/
segregated, and materials for recycling are separated and prepared for processing. Hazardous
wastes and other wastes must be stored and disposed of according to applicable laws and
regulations.

Possible negative impacts during ship recycling may be divided into four main categories:
 Releases of Hazardous Materials to ground and sediments
 Releases of Hazardous Materials to water
 Emissions of Hazardous Materials to air
 Noise/ vibrations
Hazardous materials and waste management
Ship dismantling generates a stream of waste consisting of a mixture of materials including:
 Ferrous and non-ferrous scrap including coatings
 Components: machinery, electrical/ electronic equipment, joinery, minerals, plastics
 Consumables: oils, chemicals, gas

--- Page 129 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

127
 Hazardous Wastes: asbestos, coatings, PCBs, materials such as electronic waste, which may
be hazardous depending on its components and the manner in which it is disposed
The following Hazardous Materials, at the very least, should be addressed in the Ship Recycling
Facility Plan:
a) Hazardous materials contained in the ship's structure and equipment (IHM, Part I):
 Asbestos
 Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
 Ozone-depleting substances (ODSs)
 Anti-fouling compounds and systems
 Cadmium and cadmium compounds
 Hexavalent chromium and hexavalent chromium compounds
 Lead and lead compounds
 Mercury and mercury compounds
 Polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs)
 Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs)
 Polychlorinated naphthalenes (PCNs)
 Radioactive substances
 Certain short-chain chlorinated paraffins
b) Operationally generated wastes (IHM, Part II):
 Waste oil (sludge)
 Bilge and/or waste water generated by the after-treatment systems fitted on
 Machineries
 Oily liquid cargo residues
 Ballast water
 Raw sewage
 Treated sewage
 Non-oily liquid cargo residues
 Dry cargo residues
 Medical/infectious waste
 Incinerator ash
 Garbage
 Fuel tank residues
 Oily solid cargo tank residues
 Oily or chemical contaminated rags
 Dry tank residues
 Cargo residues
c) Stores including regular consumable goods (IHM, Part III). A list of these is shown in
appendix 6 of the IMO guidelines
It is recommended that the following aspects of proper management of Hazardous Materials should
be clearly addressed for each of the potentially Hazardous Materials identified above:
 identification, marking and labelling and potential on-board locations
 recycling approach
 removal, handling and remediation

--- Page 130 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

128
 storage and labelling
 treatment, transportation and disposal.
The Ship Recycling Facility should identify the location and quantity of asbestos and materials
containing asbestos by actively utilizing the IHM. Identification, marking and labelling should be
conducted by the Ship Recycling Facility before asbestos and materials containing asbestos are
removed.
Asbestos:
In order to safely remove asbestos and materials containing asbestos, the following protective
measures should be taken, and the Ship Recycling Facility Plan (SRFP) should describe how they
are implemented by the Ship Recycling Facility.
The environmentally sound management plan should consider the following:
1. The area in which the removal of asbestos and materials containing asbestos is to be conducted
should be isolated from the other work areas and entry should be allowed only to appropriately
trained personnel. The area should be clearly posted with a caution that asbestos removal work
is occurring
2. If the removal work includes cutting, boring, grinding or otherwise disturbing friable asbestos
and materials containing asbestos which may scatter into the environment, appropriate
protection should be provided, so as not to release the asbestos in the air, by isolating the area in
the room or space where the removal will occur
3. A common approach is as follows:
 seal the room or space with plastic sheets
 the plastic sheets should be of sufficient strength where the machines, equipment, pipes or
spaces cannot be isolated or sealed (for example, a complex and narrow area under a floor
plate in the engine room), partial protection may be provided with plastic sheets
 the isolated area should be maintained under negative pressure where possible
 practices for dealing with materials containing asbestos under a partial pressure chamber
system and the use of wet methods should be encouraged as far as possible
4. After removal of asbestos, the area should be cleaned in the following manner:
 Equipment and tools should be washed/cleaned and then removed from the area
 The asbestos and materials containing asbestos should be packed and sealed in plastic
containers prior to being removed from the area
 The plastic sheets used for isolating the area should be moistened with water and handled
carefully to prevent the asbestos from scattering
5. An efficient vacuum cleaner should be used for cleaning the area such as one equipped with a
high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter
6. The airborne asbestos in the air and/or space should be checked before removing the plastic
isolation sheets and allowing other work to continue in the area
PCBs (Polychlorinated Biphenyls)
In order to safely remove PCBs and materials containing PCBs, the following protective measures
should be taken and the SRFP should describe how they are implemented by the Ship Recycling
Facility:
 Removal of Hazardous Materials and wastes containing PCBs should be carefully
performed to avoid spills, volatilization or scattering, in the following manner:

--- Page 131 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

129
o Spill prevention measures should be taken when draining or removing liquid-filled
equipment, including booms, drip pans, liners and/or absorbent materials placed
around the system or piece of equipment
o Most solid materials containing PCBs can be removed by using manual, chemical or
mechanical means such as blasting, scraping, cutting, stripping or gouging
equipment used to remove PCB-containing materials should be decontaminated
appropriately after use (a common decontamination process for equipment would be
to rinse with non-polar organic solvent such as kerosene or diesel, then wash with
soap and water and rinse with clean water); any water or other liquid used should be
appropriately managed as waste
 Removed PCBs and materials containing PCBs should be appropriately stored in properly
labelled, leak-proof containers that are made for transport and are sealed (liquids) or covered
(solids)
 Separate storage area should be set up for PCB wastes, in accordance with the following
points:
o Hazardous Materials and wastes containing PCBs should not be stored or kept with
other Hazardous Materials and wastes
o the storage area should be clearly marked on the exterior with warnings that it
contains PCBs
o the storage area should provide protection from rain
o containers should be regularly inspected for leaks and damage
 Containers or vehicles used for packing and transporting the removed PCB materials should
be properly labelled and the possibility of accidental release during transport should be
minimized
 PCBs should not be reused or recycled and their management and final disposal should
comply with national requirements.
Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS):
The Ship Recycling Facility should identify the location and quantity of Ozone-Depleting
Substances (ODSs) prior to removal by actively utilizing the Inventory of Hazardous Materials
(IHM). The indicative list for ODSs in the Inventory Guidelines (section 2.2.2.3 of appendix 5 of
the IMO guidelines) can be used as the supporting material if an additional survey and sampling are
required. The SRFP should describe how the Ship Recycling Facility implements the following
protective measures to safely remove and manage ODSs:
 Extraction of ODSs from the system should be done by persons who are trained and
authorized for handling such materials
 ODSs on board in containers, equipment and piping systems should not be released into the
atmosphere
 Management or destruction of ODSs should comply with National requirements
 ODSs used as blowing agents and trapped in insulation foam in refrigerated areas should not
be released into the atmosphere and environmentally sound management should be observed
while dismantling and disposing of the foam waste.
Paints and coatings:
The SRFP should describe procedures for properly managing any paints and coatings that are
highly flammable or that may release toxins during cutting.

--- Page 132 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

130
 Anti-fouling compounds and systems (organotin compounds including tributyltin (TBT)) -
Organotin compounds include tributyltin (TBT), triphenyltin (TPT) and tributyltin oxide
(TBTO). Organotin compounds have been commonly used as anti-fouling paint on the
bottom of ships. Organotin paint should not be released into the sea or soil during the ship
recycling process. If it is possible that organotin paint might be removed as a result of work
(whether it is intentionally removed, or the collateral effect of some other effort, such as
dragging), the work should be conducted in an environmentally sound manner to ensure that
any organotin paint removed is not released into the sea. Organotin paint may be removed
using techniques such as blasting, chemical stripping or mechanical removal. However,
special attention should be given to preventing scattering of the paint chips in the air or
adjacent areas. Blasted paints should be collected, stored and disposed of in an
environmentally sound manner in accordance with National requirements.
 Toxic and highly flammable paints - The removal of paints prior to cutting during ship
recycling may not be necessary unless the process leads to the release of toxic compounds
or the paint is highly flammable. Prior to cutting painted surfaces, the Ship Recycling
Facility should check the flammability and toxicity of the paint or coating. If it is toxic or
flammable, it is suggested that, prior to hot cutting, a sufficiently wide band of paint is
mechanically or chemically removed (for example, through blasting, scraping or stripping)
from along the cut line. Appropriate PPE should be worn, and a containment system for
paint particles should be used (especially for blasting operations). If removal is not possible
or feasible, cutting can proceed in a controlled manner provided that the workers are well
protected with PPEs specifically designed for breathing and eye protection.
 Hazardous liquids, residues and sediments (such as oils, bilge and ballast water) -
Identification, marking and labelling of the tanks and other areas should be conducted by the
Ship Recycling Facility before the liquids are removed. The residual oil storage tank should
be protected against leakage, overflow, fire and other potential accidents. Hazardous liquids,
residues and sediments in stores, tanks, machines, equipment and piping should be removed
under safe and environmentally sound conditions. Ballast water should be handled in
accordance with relevant national requirements.
 Heavy metals (lead, mercury, cadmium and hexavalent chromium) - Heavy metals are found
in batteries, galvanized materials, level switches, gyro compasses, thermometers, coatings,
etc. Radioactive substances may be found in level indicators and smoke detectors.
Equipment and other instruments containing heavy metals should be removed carefully to
ensure that they do not break and to avoid contamination of the environment. Reusable
equipment and instruments should be stored properly. Broken equipment and instruments
should be delivered to the appropriate companies for repair, recycling or disposal in
accordance with national requirements. Anodes fitted to the ship's hull as sacrificial metal
should be removed in the course of block cutting and should be managed properly.
Spill prevention, control and countermeasures
The SRFP should include a programme that defines the Ship Recycling Facility's procedures for
spill prevention, response and countermeasures. The programme should define proactive
approaches to spill prevention and procedures to be implemented in the event of spills.
At a minimum, the programme should demonstrate that the Ship Recycling Facility has adequate
containment and spill clean-up equipment and procedures, by identifying the following:

--- Page 133 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

131
 containment and diversionary structures in place to prevent discharged Hazardous Materials
from contaminating soil and water
 Facility drainage areas
 Location of spill response equipment
 Environmental protection measures to be implemented during transfer and offloading of fuels
 Location of other oils and bilges
 Fuel storage locations
 Inspection and record-keeping procedures
 Security measures
 Personnel training programmes
 Spill prevention and reporting procedures
 The history of incidents at the Ship Recycling Facility
As part of the procedures for spill prevention, response and countermeasures, the SRFP should
identify the designated in-house and subcontracted personnel who will be responsible for managing
the programme and for responding to spills or similar emergencies, as well as the local authorities
(such as the fire department) that may have jurisdiction at the Ship Recycling Facility. This SRFP
should include 24-hour contact information. The SRFP should include both a narrative and graphic
description of the Facility layout, including the location of any water bodies or other routes of
migration, the storage location of oil or other Hazardous Materials, procedures for fuel transfer
from ship to shore, procedures to be implemented in the event of a spill and the types and locations
of emergency-response equipment (such as absorbent materials, personal protective equipment and
first-aid equipment).
Storm water pollution prevention
Storm-water run-off from industrial facilities has the potential to adversely affect the environment.
Improper storage and handling of Hazardous Materials and wastes could increase the risk of
environmental degradation through contact with water. Following compilation of the relevant site
information, an assessment should be conducted in order to determine the appropriate control
measures. Control measures should be implemented to reduce the threat of storm-water pollution, to
control erosion and sediment and to protect nearby natural resources. Control measures can include
best management practices, maintenance and inspection programmes, employee training and
reporting. The development of preventive measures is the most effective way to minimize the
discharge of pollutants via storm water. It is important to maintain records on maintenance,
inspections and employee training. Periodic review of the storm-water management programme is
also an effective tool for determining which best management practices are fulfilling their intended
function and for identifying weaknesses in the programme.
Debris prevention and control
The introduction of debris into the marine environment by ship recycling activities has the potential
to adversely affect the environment. The SRFP should include a programme that defines measures
to be implemented and maintained to minimize the potential for debris deposition into the water,
including the maintenance of areas from which debris might be transported into the marine
environment by wind, storm drains, tides or run-off. Control measures should be implemented to
reduce the likelihood of debris deposition.

--- Page 134 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

132
Noise/ vibrations
Ongoing varying types of dismantling activities will result in noise and vibrations. The monitoring
programme for noise and vibrations must include location of the monitoring stations, detailed
procedures for the measurements, frequency of measurements, and reporting. The monitoring
station for noise and vibrations should be located at the dwelling closest to the ship dismantling
facility. Meteorological conditions should also be recorded as they may affect the spread of noise.
The highest noise level will most likely be measured at a monitoring station located down-wind
from the ship dismantling facility. Influence from other sources in the area (e.g. traffic, industry)
should be evaluated, since these could affect the resulting noise level at the monitoring stations.

2.2.
Health and Safety Issues:
Table - Common Occupational Health Issues
Hazard
Description
Mitigation Measures
Chemical
Workers exposure to PCBs found in
softener of plastics, insulators, sealing
materials and cables can lead to
cancer, liver damage, reproductive
impairments,
immune
system
damage,
and
behavioural
and
neurological damage.

Workers
exposure
to
hydrogen
chloride
gas
produced
after
combustion of PVCs found in cables,
floor coverings and plastic devices
leads to lung cancer and supress
immune system.

Workers
exposure
to
dioxins
produced after combustion of PVCs
and PCBs leads to lung cancer and
supress immune system.

Workers exposure to PAHs produced
after combustion of PVCs produced
during torch cutting and smoldering
of paints leads to malignant tumors,
affects the lungs, stomach, intestine
and skin.

Workers exposure to asbestos dust
found in gaskets, cables, adhesives,
valves, etc. leads to cancer of lungs,
stomach, esophagus, pancreas and
kidneys.
 The SRFP should identify one or more
key personnel who possess the level of
training and experience necessary to
effectively ensure that safe conditions are
maintained during operations at the Ship
Recycling Facility, including one or more
competent persons for the performance of
specific work. Depending upon the size
of the Ship Recycling Facility and the
number of workers, the SRFP could
include a hierarchy of safety and health
management staff, including an overall
manager, supervisory staff and general
workers.
 The SRFP should include the procedures
to be implemented to conduct a job-
hazard assessment to determine the
proper approach to maximizing worker
safety. Responsibility for job hazard
assessments should be assigned to a
competent person for the specific hazards
of each job.
 Establish and utilize procedures to
prevent explosions by ensuring that Safe-
for-hot-work
and
Safe-for-entry
conditions are established and maintained
throughout the ship recycling process. To
prevent other accidents that cause or have
the potential to cause damage to human
health and to prevent spills of cargo
residues and other materials which may

--- Page 135 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

133

Workers exposure to heavy metals
found in paints, coatings, anodes and
electrical equipments such as mercury
(Minamata disease), lead (kidney and
brain damage and increased blood
pressure), arsenic (cancer), chromium
(lung cancer) etc.

Workers exposure to fumes, smoke
and particulate produced during torch
cutting of metals which may lead to
toxic effects.

Workers exposure to release of
poisonous gas from toxic organics
during
bilge
and
ballast
water
removal may cause serious health
effects.

Workers exposure to toxic fumes
released during removal of oil and
fuel.

Workers exposure to accidents while
working in confined spaces
cause harm to human health and/or the
environment.
 The Ship Recycling Facility should
ensure that spaces or adjacent spaces that
contain or have contained liquids, gases
or solids that are toxic, corrosive or
irritant are visually inspected and tested
by a competent person prior to initial
entry by workers. If a space contains an
air concentration of a material which
exceeds 50 per cent of their OEL, then no
one should enter the space and it should
not
be
labelled
"Safe-for-entry".
Ventilation
should
be
provided
at
volumes and flow rates sufficient to
ensure
that
air
concentrations
are
maintained below 50 per cent of their
OEL.
 The SRFP should include procedures for
handling,
transporting
and
storing
pressure vessels containing flammable
gases, such as acetylene (C2H2), propane
gas (C3H8) or oxygen (O2) for welding,
heating and cutting works, in order to
avoid any human injuries, caused by
external forces, shock or heat to such
vessels.
Physical
Risk of falling from height inside ship
structures or on the ground

Risk of fire and explosion while
working on flammable materials

Risk of cuts and bruises while
working with sharp edged tools, saws,
grinders abrasive cutting wheels,
shackles,
hooks,
chains,
cranes,
hoisting & hauling equipments etc.

Risk of heavy metals falling from
height on workers.
 The SRFP should include procedures for
using personal flotation devices, guarding
deck openings, deck edges and platforms,
utilizing personal fall arrest systems and
guard rails and ensuring safe access to
ships to prevent slip-and-fall accidents
and the dropping and scattering of
objects. Communication of daily work
plan to workers.
 The SRFP should include procedures for
testing and inspecting ropes, chains,
slings, hooks, chain-falls and hoisting and
hauling equipment. It should further
include a description of operations using
cranes, machines, mobile equipment and
aerial and man-lift systems and a list of
qualifications required for the operators.

--- Page 136 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

134
 The SRFP should include procedures for
work areas, such as aisles, passageways
and temporary deck openings.
 Respiratory
protection
and
hearing
conservation programmes should be
developed for all employees who could
be exposed to excessive levels. The SRFP
should describe how the programmes are
in compliance with national regulations.
In the absence of domestic law, the Ship
Recycling Facility should utilize best
industry practices to provide effective
respiratory
protection
and
hearing
conservation programmes.
 Emergency preparedness and response
plan (EPRP) - establish and maintain an
emergency preparedness and response
plan (EPRP). The EPRP should, at a
minimum, include the Facility's response
to:
 fire or explosion or ingress of water
on the ship being recycled or awaiting
recycling, within the perimeter of the
Facility, or in an adjacent facility
 accidents to workers within the
Facility
 spillages of Hazardous Materials
 probable acts of nature in the area
concerned, such as earthquakes or
flooding.

2.3.
Community Health & Safety:
The common health and safety impacts on the community living nearby ship breaking yards are:
 High traffic density along with traffic insecurity
 Air pollution and dust accumulation due to excessive vehicular movement
 Presence of sharp iron and glass pieces on the beach area
 Scattered waste in ship breaking yard and beach area including waste oil and asbestos
causes various health issues such as tuberculosis, asthma and various types of cancer.
 Lack of medical facilities for the local community
 High noise levels from cutting and moving metals in ship breaking yards cause disturbance
to nearly community
 Decreased fish population (major source of food for community) due to contamination of
sea water.

--- Page 137 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

135
2.4.
Social Issues
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector.

3. Performance Indicators and Monitoring
3.1.
Wastewater discharge quality standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
Ammonical
Nitrogen
mg/L
No
standar
availabl
50 (Inland surface water)75 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)75 (Irrigated land)
Ammonia
mg/L
5 (Inland surface water)5 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)15 (Irrigated land)
Arsenic
mg/L
0.2 (Inland surface water)0.05 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)0.2 (Irrigated land)
BOD5 at
20ºC
mg/L
50 (Inland surface water)250 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)100 (Irrigated land)
Boron
mg/L
2 (across all locations)
Cadmium
mg/L
0.50 (Inland surface water)0.05 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)0.05 (Irrigated land)
Chloride
mg/L
600 (across all locations)
Chromium
(as Cr)
mg/L
0.5 (Inland surface water)1.0 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)1.0 (Irrigated land)
COD
mg/L
200 (Inland surface water)400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)400 (Irrigated land)
Chromium
(hexavalent
chromium)
mg/L
0.1 (Inland surface water)1.0 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)1.0 (Irrigated land)
Copper
mg/L
0.5 (Inland surface water)3.0 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)3.0 (Irrigated land)
Dissolved
oxygen
mg/L
4.5-8 (across all locations)
Electro-
conductivity
Micro
mho/cm
1200 (across all locations)
Total
Dissolved
Solids
mg/L
2100 (across all locations)
Fluoride
mg/L
2 (Inland surface water)15 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)10 (Irrigated land)
Sulphide
mg/L
1 (Inland surface water)2 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)2 (Irrigated land)
Iron
mg/L
2 (across all locations)
Total
Kjeldahl
Nitrogen
mg/L
100 (across all locations)
Lead
mg/L
0.1 (Inland surface water)1 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)1 (Irrigated land)
Manganese
mg/L
5 (across all locations)
Mercury
mg/L
0.01 (across all locations)
Nickel
mg/L
1.0 (Inland surface water)2.0 (Public Sewerage system

--- Page 138 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

136
connected to treatment at second stage)1.0 (Irrigated land)
Nitrate
mg/L
10 (Inland surface water) 10 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)10 (Irrigated land)
Oil & grease
mg/L
10 (Inland surface water)20 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)10 (Irrigated land)
Phenolic
compounds
mg/L
1.0 (Inland surface water)5 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)1 (Irrigated land)
Dissolved
phosphorous
mg/L
8 (Inland surface water)8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)15 (Irrigated land)
pH
mg/L
6-9 (across all locations)
Selenium
mg/L
0.05 (across all locations)
Zinc
mg/L
5 (Inland surface water)10 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)10 (Irrigated land)
Suspended
solids
mg/L
150 (Inland surface water)500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)200 (Irrigated land)
Cyanide
mg/L
0.1 (Inland surface water)2.0 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage)0.2 (Irrigated land)
* The National Standards are not specific to ship breaking and is applicable for all the industrial units. The national
standards are defined as per the location of disposal – inland surface water; public sewer; irrigated land. For ease of
comparison, here the national standards are given as range and not as per the location of disposal.

3.2.
Gaseous emission standards (from point source)
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National
Standards*
Chlorine
mg/Nm3
No standards
available
150
Hydrochloric acid vapour and mist
mg/Nm3
30-120
Oxides of Nitrogen
mg/Nm3
30-100
Total fluoride
mg/Nm3
25
Sulphuric acid mist
mg/Nm3
50
Lead particulate
mg/Nm3
10
Mercury particulate
mg/Nm3
0.2
* The National Standards are not specific to ship breaking and is applicable for all the industrial
units.

4. General Description of Industry Activities
Sector Activity
Description
Mooring
Ship dismantling operations start after the ship is beached safely and evenly
supported by the mooring mechanisms. The vessel which is usually a massive
structure, has to be moored and secured properly for safe dismantling
operation. During available high tide water level, the partially dismantled
structure has to be slide up facilitating further dismantling of parts of ships that
have emerged out of water. Any of the ship breaking yards follow the
generalized procedure after towing the ship on site for scrapping.
Gas freeing
The ship is surveyed to identify the probable scraps to be taken off and various
compartment of ship to plan the work based on the potential location of
hazardous materials. Gas freeing is the method used for removal of oil and
inflammable vapour of oils so that the dismantling of ship‘s parts using ‗hot
works‘ can be undertaken without any fire hazard. Inflammable materials
remaining in tanks or piping such as fuel, lubricating oils, hydraulic fluids,

--- Page 139 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

137
cargos, their residues and grease are removed. The vessel is then cleared off
gas and oil residues. Removal of fuel oil and other combustible materials is
continued throughout the ship breaking operations.
Removal of
paints
Prior to ship dismantling, paint removal is done along the marking for cutting
of blocks and pieces. This enables fire hazard free cutting operation. All paints
are highly inflammable and any trace of paint present in the cutting line can
cause fire hazard.
Cutting and
handling
The term handling is used to describe the process of supporting, moving, and
releasing of dismantled products. The ship is dismantled starting from easily
accessible area from the topo bottom. The workers firstly work on the upper
decks and the superstructure for cutting which is followed by the middle and
lower decks. They use saw and cutting torches to dismantle the ship where
large blocks are cut and allowed to fall freely or separated by using the crane
to the stack location for further cutting. As the structures are cut in due course
of time, the weight of the ship reduces and the lower regions of the ship rises
up.
Lifting
Removal of dismantled hull, outfit and machinery of the dismantled ship either
using a frame, chain pulley block and or using crane is considered as lifting.
The lifting arrangement and procedures should be taken into account in the
cutting plan. The lifting operations include vertical and horizontal movement
of dismantled products within the dismantling yard. Bilge water is sampled
and discharged with remaining structure pulled ashore and further cut.
Fixtures, anchors, chains and other small equipments are removed initially.
Other large equipments are dismantled in due course as they become
accessible. Reusable equipments can be sold directly by the scrapping facility
directly. The propellers are also removed from the ship so that the base of the
ship is pulled towards the beach in the shallow water. Asbestos containing
material is removed from the cut lines so as to remove larger sections of the
ship.
Buffering and
sorting
Buffering and secondary cutting activity involve stacking the dismantled parts
of the ship and preparation of these for further cutting into smaller components
such as plates, stiffeners, brackets and cut pieces. The PCB material is also cut
and removed simultaneously. The scrap metals including steel, aluminum,
copper, copper-nickel alloy and other metals are sorted, graded and sold to
scrap metal brokers and melting firms. Some valuable materials such as copper
in the electric cable are mixed with the non-ferrous material and recovered by
using shredders and separators. The shredders after mixing produce a gravel
like mixture from which metal is taken out using magnetic separators, air
flotation, separator columns, or shaker tables.
Disposal
Some equipments such as engine, auxiliary diesel motors, cranes, radar,
electronic equipments which and be directly used are sold to the vendors.
Tools, auxiliaries, lamps, TVs, fax machines, radios, tables, beds, fluorescent
tubes, kitchen fittings, benches, ropes, safes, cables, ornamental plastic
sheeting can be marketed to resellers.

--- Page 140 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

138
18.8. ESRM Guidance Note for Power Sector

1. Introduction
The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM for the Power Sector is to provide a high level
indicative summary of potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and performance levels for
transactions in the Power sector in Bangladesh. The scope of application will be fully aligned with
the Section 4 of Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and FIs. At all times, applicable national
regulations are to be followed. Where national regulations differ from the levels and measures
presented in this Guidance Note, loan proposals are expected to achieve whichever is more
stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those provided in this Guidance Note are
appropriate, in view of specific loan proposal, a full and detailed justification for any proposed
alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This justification should
demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of human health and
the environment. For the purposes of this Guidance Note, Conventional Power plants include, but
are not limited to: a) Coal based power plant, b) Gas based power plant, c)Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO)
and High Speed Diesel (HSD) based power plant

2. Industry Specific Impacts and Management

2.1.
Environmental Issues:
 Air Emissions
Combustion of fossil fuels or biomass release pollutants such as sulphur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen
oxides (NOX), particulate matter (PM), carbon monoxide (CO), and greenhouse gases, such as
carbon dioxide (CO2). Depending on the fuel type and quality other substances such as heavy
metals (e.g., mercury, arsenic, cadmium, vanadium, nickel, etc.), halide compounds (including
hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride), dioxins and furans, unburned hydrocarbons and other
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) may be emitted in smaller quantities, but may have a
significant influence on the environment due to their toxicity and/or persistence. The amount and
nature of air emissions depends on factors such as the fuel (e.g., coal, fuel oil, natural gas, or
biomass), the type and design of the combustion unit (e.g., reciprocating engines, combustion
turbines, or boilers), operating practices, emission control measures (e.g., primary combustion
control, secondary flue gas treatment), and the overall system efficiency. Natural gas-fired plants
generally produce negligible quantities of particulate matter and sulphur oxides. The levels of
nitrogen oxides in these plants are about 60% of those using coal for combustion (without emission
reduction measures). Natural gas-fired plants also release lower quantities of carbon dioxide gas.
Table - Sources of Air Emissions and Mitigation Measures
Air emission/
pollutant
Source
Mitigation measures
Particulate
matter
(point
sources)
Particulate
matter
is
emitted
from
the
combustion
process,
especially from the use of
heavy fuel oil, coal, and
solid biomass
 Installation of dust controls capable of over
99% removal
efficiency, such as ESPs or fabric filters
(bughouses), for coal-fired power plants

--- Page 141 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

139
Particulate
matter (fugitive
sources)
Particulate
matter
can
also be released during
transfer and storage of
coal and additives, such
as lime.
 Use of loading and unloading equipment that
minimizes the height of fuel drop to the stockpile
to reduce the generation of fugitive dust and use of
cyclone dust collectors
 Use of water spray systems to reduce the
formation of fugitive dust from solid fuel storage
 Use of enclosed conveyors and extraction /
filtration equipment on conveyor transfer points
 For solid fuels of which fine fugitive dust
could contain vanadium, nickel and Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) (e.g., in coal and
petroleum coke), use of full
 enclosure during transportation and covering
stockpiles where necessary
 Design and operate transport systems to
minimize the generation and transport of dust on
site
 Storage of lime or limestone in silos with well
designed, extraction and filtration equipment
 Use of wind fences in open storage of coal or
use of enclosed storage structures to minimize
fugitive dust
Sulphur
Dioxide
Emissions
of
sulphur
oxides mainly result from
the presence of sulphur in
the fuel.
 Use of fuels with the lowest sulphur content
economically feasible
 Use of lime (CaO) or limestone (CaCO3) for
integrated desulfurization in coal-fired fluidized
bed combustion boilers. This can achieve a
removal efficiency of up to approximately 95
percent
 Depending on the plant size, fuel quality, and
potential for significant SO2 emissions, use of flue
gas desulfurization (FGD) for large boilers using
coal or oil and for large reciprocating engines. The
optimal type of FGD system (e.g., wet FGD using
limestone with up to 98 percent removal
efficiency, semi-dry FGD using lime with up to 94
percent removal efficiency, seawater FGD with up
to 90 percent removal efficiency) depends on the
capacity of the plant, fuel properties, site
conditions, residual life of the facility and the cost
and availability of reagent as well as by-product
disposal and utilization. However, if biomass is
used as fuel, FGD may not be necessary as it
contains lesser amount of coal.

--- Page 142 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

140
 Oil-fired reciprocating engine plants are
generally too small in capacity to justify wet
scrubbing, due to costs. If reducing fuel sulphur is
insufficient, these plants would generally use
semi-dry scrubbing using either slaked/hydrated
lime (Ca(OH)2) or sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3)
Nitrogen
Oxides

 Use of low NOX burners with other
combustion modifications, such as low excess air
(LEA) firing, for boiler plants
 Installation of additional NOX controls for
boilers may be necessary to meet emissions limits;
a selective catalytic reduction (SCR) system can
be used for pulverized coal fired, oil-fired, and
gas-fired boilers or a selective non-catalytic
reduction (SNCR) system for a fluidized-bed
boiler
 Use
of
dry
low-NOX
combustors
for
combustion turbines burning natural gas
 Use of water injection or SCR for combustion
turbines and reciprocating engines burning liquid
fuels
 Optimization of operational parameters for
existing reciprocating engines burning natural gas
to reduce NOx emissions
 Use of lean-burn concept or SCR for new gas
engines
Carbon
monoxide
Carbon monoxide (CO)
is
an
intermediate
product
of
the
combustion process.

 Complete combustion of fuel
 Good furnace design, the use of high
performance monitoring and process control
techniques, and maintenance of the combustion
system
Heavy metals
The emission of heavy
metals, also known as
trace metals, results from
their
presence
as
natural
component
in
fossil fuels. Examples of
heavy
metals
include
mercury in coal and
Vanadium in heavy fuel
oil.
 Use of conventional secondary controls such
as fabric filters or ESPs operated in combination
with FGD techniques, such as limestone FGD, Dry
Lime FGD, or sorbent injection
 Additional removal of metals such as mercury
can be achieved in a high particulate SCR system
along with powdered activated carbon, bromine-
enhanced Powdered Activated Carbon (PAC) or
other sorbents

--- Page 143 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

141
 Energy efficiency and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Carbon dioxide, one of the major greenhouse gases (GHGs) under the UN Framework Convention
on Climate Change, is emitted from the combustion of fossil fuels. The CO2 emission is directly
related to the carbon content of fuels, where gaseous fuels have significantly lower CO2 emissions
than other fossil fuels. The content of carbon varies for coal and lignite (hard and brown coal)
between 61 and 87 wt-%, for wood it is about 50 wt-%, and for gasoil and heavy fuel oil about 85
wt-%. Potential emissions mitigation measures from the outset of thermal power plant design
should be adopted and some recommendations are
 Use of less carbon intensive fossil fuels (i.e., fuel that contains less carbon per unit of
calorific value—gas is less than oil and oil is less than coal) or co-firing with low-carbon fuels
(e.g., biomass).
 Use of higher energy conversion efficiency technology, subject to its technical suitability for
the application and financial feasibility. For example, supercritical plants have a higher energy
conversion efficiency than subcritical plants, combined cycle gas turbine (CCGT) plants have a
higher energy conversion efficiency than simple cycle plants, and CHP have higher energy
conversion efficiency than power only plants.
 Other elements of the plant can also affect efficiency such as steam cycle parameters (e.g.,
pressure and temperature) for power plants based on the steam Rankine cycle, cooling and
abatement technologies, electrical efficiency (e.g., electrical motors for fans and pumps, ESP),
energy conversion efficiency and energy conservation. Use of high performance monitoring and
process control techniques, good design and maintenance of the combustion system so that
initially designed efficiency and GHG emission performance can be maintained.
 Water consumption and wastewater effluents
Conventional power plant requires large amounts of cooling water for steam condensation during
operation. Water is also required for boiler makeup, auxiliary station equipment, ash handling, and
FGD systems. The withdrawal of such large quantities of water has the potential to compete with
other important water uses such as agricultural irrigation, drinking water sources or maintaining
other ecosystems services. The mitigation measures to reduce water consumption and some good
practices include:
 Maximize recycle/reuse of treated waste water to ensure zero water discharge to conserve
water.
 Installation of rain water harvesting structures in and around the project site.
 Installation of water meters throughout the power plant to monitor the usage of water at
different sections.
Combustion facilities using once-through cooling systems require large quantities of water which
are discharged back to receiving surface water with elevated temperature. Withdrawal and
discharge with elevated temperature and chemical contaminants such as biocides or other additives,
if used, may affect aquatic organisms, including phytoplankton, zooplankton, fish, crustaceans,
shellfish, and many other forms of aquatic life. Aquatic organisms drawn into cooling water intake
structures are either impinged on components of the cooling water intake structure or entrained in
the cooling water system itself. In the case of either impingement or entrainment, aquatic organisms
may be killed or subjected to significant harm. There may be special concerns about the potential
impacts of cooling water intake structures located in or near habitat areas that support threatened,
endangered, or other protected species or where local fishery is active. Recommendations to

--- Page 144 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

142
minimize, and control environmental impacts associated with water withdrawal by power plants
include:

 Use of multi-port diffusers.
 Adjustment of the discharge temperature, flow, outfall location, and outfall design to
minimize impacts to acceptable level (i.e., extend length of discharge channel before reaching
the surface water body for pre-cooling or change location of discharge point to minimize the
elevated temperature areas).
 Use of a closed-cycle, re-circulating cooling water system as described above (e.g., natural
or forced draft cooling tower), or closed circuit dry cooling system (e.g., air cooled condensers)
if necessary to prevent unacceptable adverse impacts. Cooling ponds or cooling towers are the
primary technologies for a re-circulating cooling water system.
 In order to prevent the aquatic life including threatened, endangered, or other protected
species within the hydraulic zone during water withdrawal, barrier nets, fish handling and return
systems, fine mesh screens and aquatic filter barrier systems should be used.
Depending upon the type of combustion technology and fuel used, several wastewater streams arise
from conventional power plants including:
 Cooling tower waste water
 Ash handling wastewater
 Material storage runoff
 Metal cleaning wastewater
 Air pollution control equipment wastewater (e.g., wet FGD discharges)
 Boiler related wastewater
 Boiler chemical cleaning waste
 Rejects from water treatment plant
These wastewater effluent streams are usually generated in power plants which burn coal or
biomass. Some of these streams (e.g., ash handling wastewater) may be generated in reduced
quantities or may not be present at all in oil-fired or natural gas-fired power plants. The
characteristics of the wastewaters generated depend on the ways in which the water has been used.
Contamination arises from demineralizers; lubricating and auxiliary fuel oils; trace contaminants in
the fuel (introduced through the ash-handling wastewater and wet FGD system discharges); and
chlorine, biocides, and other chemicals used to manage the quality of water in cooling systems.
Cooling tower blow down tends to be very high in total dissolved solids but is generally classified
as non-contact cooling water and, as such, is typically subject to limits for pH, residual chlorine,
and toxic chemicals that may be present in cooling tower additives (including corrosion inhibiting
chemicals containing chromium and zinc whose use should be eliminated).Techniques for treating
industrial process wastewater in this sector include flow and load equalization with pH adjustment;
sedimentation for suspended solids reduction using settling basins or clarifiers; multimedia
filtration for reduction in non-settle able suspended solids, oil skimmers for oil & grease removal,
and activated sludge for biodegradable organic material removal. Additional engineering controls
may be required for advanced metals removal using membrane filtration or other physical/chemical
treatment technologies. Recommended measures to prevent, minimize, and control wastewater
effluents from thermal power plants include:

--- Page 145 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

143
 Recycling of wastewater in coal-fired plants for use as FGD makeup. This practice
conserves water and reduces the number of wastewater streams requiring treatment and
discharge
 In coal-fired power plants without FGD systems, treatment of process wastewater in
conventional physical-chemical treatment systems for pH adjustment and removal of total
suspended solids (TSS), and oil / grease, at a minimum
 Collection of fly ash in dry form and bottom ash in drag chain conveyor systems in new
coal-fired power plants;
 Use of infiltration and runoff control measures such as compacted soils, protective liners,
and sedimentation controls for runoff from coal piles
 Spraying of coal piles with anionic detergents to inhibit bacterial growth and minimize
acidity of leachate
 Treatment of low-volume wastewater streams that are typically collected in the boiler and
turbine room sumps in conventional oil-water separators before discharge
 Treatment of acidic low-volume wastewater streams, such as those associated with the
regeneration of makeup demineralizer and deep-bed condensate polishing systems, by chemical
neutralization in-situ before discharge
 Pre treatment of cooling tower makeup water, installation of automated bleed/feed
controllers, and use of inert construction materials to reduce chemical treatment requirements
for cooling towers
 Elimination of metals such as chromium and zinc from chemical additives used to control
scaling and corrosion in cooling towers
 Use the minimum required quantities of chlorinated biocides in place of brominated
biocides or alternatively apply intermittent shock dosing of chlorine as opposed to continuous
low-level feed.
Sanitary wastewater from industrial facilities may include effluents from domestic sewage, food
service, and laundry facilities serving site employees. Recommended sanitary wastewater
management strategies include:
 Segregation of wastewater streams to ensure compatibility with selected treatment option
(e.g., septic system, sewerage treatment plant etc. which can only accept domestic sewage)
 Segregation and pre-treatment of oil and grease containing effluents (e.g., use of a grease
trap) prior to discharge into sewer systems; etc.
Stormwater includes any surface runoff and flows resulting from precipitation, drainage and other
sources. If the water is exposed to fuel or material stored, there are chances of contamination.
Typically stormwater runoff may contains suspended sediments, metals, petroleum hydrocarbons,
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs), coliform, etc. Rapid runoff, even of uncontaminated
stormwater, also degrades the quality of the receiving water by eroding stream beds and banks.
Following options may be considered for proper handling of stormwater:
 Stormwater should be separated from process and sanitary wastewater streams in order to
reduce the volume of wastewater to be treated prior to discharge;
 Stormwater should be managed as a resource, either for groundwater recharge or for
meeting water needs at the facility if found below prescribed standards as per ECR 1997.
 Oil water separators and grease traps should be installed and maintained as appropriate at
refuelling facilities, workshops, parking areas, fuel storage and containment areas; etc.

--- Page 146 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

144
 Solid waste generation
Coal or biomass-fired power plants generate large amount of solid wastes due to ash content in the
fuel. The solid waste from coal combustion wastes includes fly ash (coarse and fine), bottom ash,
boiler waste, and FGD sludge, which is a common solid waste generated from combustion of high
sulphur content fuel. Metals are constituents of concern in both coal combustion wastes and low-
volume solid wastes. For example, ash residues and the dust removed from exhaust gases may
contain significant levels of heavy metals and some organic compounds, in addition to inert
materials. Other solid wastes from coal-fired power plants and other plants include coal mill rejects,
cooling tower sludge, and wastewater treatment sludge. Oil combustion in oil-fired power plants
generate wastes which includes fly ash and bottom ash, but are generated in significant quantities
when residual fuel oil is burned in oil-fired steam electric boilers. But oil combustion wastes are
generated in much smaller quantities as compared to large-volume coal fired power plants. Natural
gas-fired power plants generate virtually no solid waste because of the negligible ash content,
regardless of the combustion technology. The high-volume coal combustion wastes are typically
managed in landfills or surface impoundments or, increasingly, may be applied to a variety of
beneficial uses. Low-volume wastes are also managed in landfills or surface impoundments, but are
more frequently managed in surface impoundments. Recommended measures to prevent, minimize,
and control the volume of solid wastes from conventional power plants include:
 Dry handling of the coal combustion wastes, in particular fly ash. Dry handling methods do
not involve surface impoundments and, therefore, do not present the ecological risks identified
for impoundments (e.g., metal uptake by wildlife).
 Reuse of sludge from treatment of waste waters from FGD plants. This sludge may be re-
used in the FGD plant due to the calcium components. It can also be used as an additive in coal-
fired plant combustion to improve the ash melting behaviour.
 Dry collection of bottom ash and fly ash from power plants combusting heavy fuel oil if
containing high levels of economically valuable metals such as vanadium and recycle for
vanadium recovery (where economically viable) or disposal in a permitted landfill with
environmental controls
 Management of ash disposal and reclamation so as to minimize environmental impacts –
especially the migration of toxic metals, if present, to nearby surface and groundwater bodies, in
addition to the transport of suspended solids in surface runoff due to seasonal precipitation and
flooding. In particular, construction, operation, and maintenance of surface impoundments
should be conducted in accordance with internationally recognized standards.
Ash residues are not typically classified as a hazardous waste due to their inert nature. However,
where ash residues are expected to contain potentially significant levels of heavy metals,
radioactivity, or other potentially hazardous materials, they should be tested at the start of plant
operations to verify their classification as hazardous or non-hazardous according to local
regulations or internationally recognized standards. There are multiple ways through which fly ash
can be beneficially used such as use as raw material for manufacturing concrete.
 Hazardous Materials and Oil
Hazardous materials and petroleum products stored and used in conventional power plants include
solid, liquid, and gaseous fuels; wastewater treatment chemicals; and equipment and facility
maintenance chemicals (e.g., paint, lubricants, and cleaners). The other sources of hazardous
materials are petroleum, including spills during transport and storage.

--- Page 147 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

145
 Use of double-walled, underground pressurized tanks for storage of pure liquefied ammonia
(e.g., for use as reagent for SCR) in quantities over 100 m3; tanks of lesser capacity should be
manufactured using annealing processes
 Establishing hazardous materials management priorities based on hazard analysis of risky
operations identified through Social and Environmental Assessment
 Where practicable, avoiding or minimizing the use of hazardous materials. For example,
non-hazardous materials have been found to substitute asbestos in building materials, PCBs in
electrical equipment, persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in pesticides formulations, and ozone
depleting substances in refrigeration systems
 Preventing uncontrolled releases of hazardous materials to the environment or uncontrolled
reactions that might result in fire or explosion
 Using engineering controls (containment, automatic alarms, and shut-off systems)
commensurate with the nature of hazard
 Implementing management controls (procedures, inspections, communications, training, and
drills) to address residual risks that have not been prevented or controlled through engineering
measures

2.2.
Health and Safety Issues:
In Bangladesh, Occupational health and safety risks and mitigation measures during construction,
operation, and decommissioning of conventional power plants are similar to those at other large
industrial facilities, the additional safety issues in the power sector is related to working at heights,
fire, electrical, noise and heat in the power plants. The table below enlists the various occupational
health and safety issues that are commonly observed in the power plants in Bangladesh which need
to be addressed immediately to ensure sustainable growth of the sector. The table below is a list of
commonly observed hazards mainly categorised into chemical and physical hazards in the power
sector and its mitigation measures.

Table - Common Occupational Health & Safety Issues
Hazard
OHS risks
Description
Mitigation Measures
Physical
Electric
Hazards
Workers may have a high
exposure
to
electric
and
magnetic fields (EMF) due to
working
in
proximity
to
electric
power
generators,
equipment,
and
connecting
high-voltage
transmission
lines. Exposure to EMF can
cause Non-ionising radiation.
Occupational EMF exposure should
be prevented or minimized through
an EMF safety program:
 Identification
of
potential
exposure levels, including the use
of
personal
monitors
during
working activities;
 Training of workers in the
identification of occupational EMF
levels and hazards;
 Establishment and identification
of EMF safety zones, and limiting
access to elevated EMF zones to
properly trained workers;
 Actions to address occupational

--- Page 148 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

146
exposure may include limiting
exposure
time
through
work
rotation, increasing the distance
between the source and the worker,
or use of shielding.
Heat
Physical contact of workers
with hot surfaces such as
boilers, pipes, and related hot
equipment
in
conventional
power
plants
or
moving
equipment during operation
and maintenance.
 Use of warning signs near high
temperature surfaces and personal
protective equipment (PPE).
 Provision of adequate ventilation
in work areas to reduce heat and
humidity.
 Regular
inspection
and
maintenance of pressure vessels,
piping, and boilers safety controls
etc.
Fire
explosion
hazard

Fire and explosion hazards
from handling and storage of
fuels such as coal, HSD/LDO
& natural
gas
and
other
chemicals and gases.
 Storing flammables away from
ignition sources and oxidizing
materials. Further, flammables
storage area should be:
 Remote from entry and exit
points into buildings
 Away from facility ventilation
intakes or vents
 Have natural or passive floor
and ceiling level ventilation and
explosion venting
 Use spark-proof fixtures
 Be
equipped
with
fire
extinguishing devices and self-
closing doors, and constructed of
materials made to withstand flame
impingement for a moderate period
of time
 Providing bonding and grounding
of, and between, containers and
additional mechanical floor level
ventilation if materials are being,
or could be, dispensed in the
storage area
 Where the flammable material is
mainly
comprised
of
dust,
providing electrical grounding,
spark detection, and, if needed,
quenching systems

--- Page 149 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

147
 Defining
and
labelling
fire
hazards areas to warn of special
rules (e.g. prohibition in use of
smoking
materials,
cellular
phones, or other potential spark
generating equipment)
 Providing specific worker training
in
handling
of
flammable
materials, and in fire prevention
or suppression
 Preparation of on-site and off-site
emergency preparedness plan.
 Implementation
of
OSHA,
NIOSH or ISO 18001 in the plant
to ensure use of safe work
practices.
Noise

Noise pollution sources in
thermal
power
facilities
include
turbine
generators,
boilers,
diesel
generators,
reciprocating engines, fans and
ductwork,
pumps,
compressors,
condensers,
piping and valves, motors,
transformers, switchyard area
and cooling towers..

 Use PPEs in high noise areas such
Turbine-generator
area,
boiler
area, Diesel generator areas etc.
 Use of noise control techniques
such as: using acoustic machine
enclosures; selecting structures
according to their noise isolation
effect to envelop the building;
using mufflers or silencers in
intake and exhaust channels;
using sound absorptive materials
in walls and ceilings; using
vibration isolators and flexible
connections;
prevent
possible
noise leakage through openings
and minimize pressure variations
in piping.
 Siting
new
facilities
with
consideration of distances from
the noise sources to the receptors
(e.g.,
residential
receptors,
schools,
hospitals,
religious
places) to the extent possible.
 Provision of green belt around the
plant will further reduce noise
levels.
Working at
Heights
Workers may be exposed to
fall hazard when they are
 Installation of guardrails with
mid-rails and toe boards at the

--- Page 150 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

148
working at height more than
two meters. Risks include fall
into operating machinery; into
water or other liquid; into
hazardous
substances;
or
through an opening in a work
surface.
edge of any fall hazard area
 Proper
use
of
ladders
and
scaffolds by trained employees
 Use of fall prevention devices,
including safety belt and lanyard
travel limiting devices to prevent
access to fall hazard area, or fall
protection devices such as full
body
harnesses
used
in
conjunction with shock absorbing
lanyards or self-retracting inertial
fall arrest devices attached to
fixed anchor point or horizontal
life-lines
 Appropriate
training
in
use,
serviceability, and integrity of the
necessary PPE
 Inclusion
of
rescue
and/or
recovery plans, and equipment to
respond to workers after an
arrested fall
Chemical Dust
Exposure to fine particles such
as dust which is associated
with handling of solid fuels,
additives, and solid wastes
(e.g. ash) can lead to serious
respiratory diseases such as
silicosis, skin & lung cancer,
black lung etc.


 Use of dust controls (e.g., exhaust
ventilation) to keep dust below
applicable guidelines
 Control
of
dust
through
implementation
of
good
housekeeping and maintenance
 Use of water sprinkling system to
suppress
dust
in
solid
fuel
handling areas and ash dykes.
 Regular
inspection
and
maintenance
of
asbestos
containing
materials
(e.g.,
insulation in older plants may
contain
asbestos)
to
prevent
airborne asbestos particles; etc.
 Implementation
of
OSHA,
NIOSH or OHSAS in the plant to
ensure use of safe work practices.
Hazardous
chemicals

Exposure to chemicals while
handling hazardous chemicals
such as corrosives (acids &
bases), oxidizers, solvents etc.
mainly in water treatment plant
 Use
of
personal
protective
equipment (PPE)
 Fixture of local alarm with a flash
light to indicate emergency in
control room in case of hazard.

--- Page 151 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

149
for
production
of
demineralised water used in
conventional power plants.

Exposure to Ammonia and
chlorine near NOx control
systems and cooling towers
and boilers can lead to major
respiratory and allergic contact
dermatitis.
 A Material Safety Data Sheet
(MSDS) should be fixed in
hazardous
chemicals
storage
areas.
 Training workers in the use of the
available information (such as
MSDSs), safe work practices, and
appropriate use of PPE.

2.3.
Community Health & Safety:
 Water consumption: Convectional power plant utilizes large amounts of water for
electricity generation. Water is usually taken from surface waters, but sometimes ground waters
or municipal supplies are also used which may affect supply of water for local communities.
Water consumption should be minimized as discussed in above in Section 1: Environment. The
potential effects of water use should be assessed at the project‘s design phase to ensure that the
project does not compromise the availability of water for personal hygiene, agriculture,
recreation, and other community needs
 Traffic safety: During operation of power plant there is a heavy vehicular movement for
transportation of fuels, chemicals and additives which may be a risk to local community
pertaining to traffic related injuries.
 Air quality: Installation and operation of conventional power plants may attract locally
based cement plants in the vicinity which may deteriorate ambient air quality of nearby areas
due to stack and fugitive emissions.

2.4.
Social Issues:
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘

3. Performance Indicators and Monitoring

3.1.
Wastewater discharge quality standards
(To be applicable at relevant wastewater stream: e.g., from FGD system, low volume waste sources,
wet ash transport, metal cleaning waters, boiler blow down, washing boiler / air pre heater and
precipitator, boiler acid washing, regeneration of demineralizers and condensate polishers, oil-
separated water, site drainage, coal pile runoff, once through cooling water and cooling water)
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
pH
S.U.
6 – 9
6 – 9
(across all discharge locations i.e. inland
surface water, public sewer and irrigated
land)
BOD5
mg/L
50
50 - 100

--- Page 152 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

150
COD
mg/L
250
200 - 400
Total
Suspended
Solids
mg/L
50
150 (inland surface water), 200 (irrigated
land), 500 (public sewer
Sulphide
mg/L
1.0
1-2
Chromium
(hexavalent)
mg/L
0.1
0.5 - 1
Chromium (total)
mg/L
0.5
0.1 – 1
Chloride
mg/L
1000
600
Sulphate
mg/L
300
400
Ammonia
mg/L
10
Oil & grease
mg/L
10
10
Total nitrogen
mg/L
10
50-75
Total phosphorus
mg/L
8-15
Phenols
mg/L
0.5
Total
coliform
bacteria
MPN/100 ml
400
No national standard
Temperature
increase
oC
No national standard
* The National Standards are not specific to power sector and is applicable for all the industrial units. The national
standards are defined as per the location of disposal – inland surface water; public sewer; irrigated land.

3.2.
Emission Levels
Emissions levels for the design and operation of each project should be established through the EA
process on the basis of country legislation and the recommendations provided in this guidance
document, as applied to local conditions. The emissions levels selected should be justified in the
EA. The maximum emissions levels given here can be consistently achieved by well designed,
well-operated, and well-maintained pollution control systems. In contrast, poor operating or
maintenance procedures affect actual pollutant removal efficiency and may reduce it to well below
the design specification. Dilution of air emissions to achieve these guidelines is unacceptable.
Compliance with ambient air quality guidelines should be assessed on the basis of good
international industry practice (GIIP) recommendations.
3.3.
Ambient air quality standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National
Standards*
Averaging
period
Value
Particulate Matter
PM10
µg/m3
1 year
70 (Interim target-1)
50 (Interim target-2)
30 (Interim target-3)
20 (guideline)
100 – 500
µg/m3
24 Hour
150 (Interim target-1)
100 (Interim target-2)
75 (Interim target-3)
50 (guideline)
Particulate Matter
µg/m3
1 year
35 (Interim target-1)

--- Page 153 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

151
* The National Standards are not specific to power sector and is applicable for all the industrial units. The national
standards are defined as per the categories of areal – industrial and mixed; commercial and mixed; residential and
rural; sensitive. For ease of comparison, here the national standards are given as range and not as per the location of
disposal. Also, no limit has been set for Ozone in the national standard

3.4.
Gaseous emission standards (in mg/Nm3 or as indicated)
Pollutants
Particulate
Matter (PM)
Sulphur Dioxide
(SO2)
Nitrogen Oxides (NOx)
Excess Dry
Gas O2
Content
NDA
DA
NDA
DA
NDA
DA
Reciprocating Engine
Natural
Gas
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
200 (Spark Ignition)
400 (Dual Fuel)
200
(Spark
Ignition)
400 (Dual
Fuel)
15
Liquid
Fuels
(Plant
≥50MWth
to
<300MWt
50
30
1,170
or use
of
2% or
less S
fuel
0.5% S
1,460 (Compression
Ignition, bore size
diameter [mm] <
400)
1,850 (Compression
Ignition, bore size
diameter [mm] ≥
400)
400
15
Liquid
Fuels
(Plant
≥300MWt
50
30
585 or
use of
or less
S fuel
0.25% S
740
400
15
Biofuels /
Gaseous
Fuels
50
30
N/A
N/A
30% higher limits
than those provided
above for Natural
200
(Spark
Ignition)
15
PM2.5
25 (Interim target-2)
15 (Interim target-3)
10 (guideline)
µg/m3
24 Hour
75 (Interim target-1)
50 (Interim target-2)
37.5 (Interim target-3)
25 (guideline)
Sulphur
Dioxide
µg/m3
24 hour
20
30 – 120
10 minute
500
Oxides of Nitrogen
µg/m3
1 year
40
30 – 100
1 hour
200
Ozone

8-hour daily
maximum
160 (Interim target-1)
100 (guideline)

--- Page 154 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

152
other than
Natural
Gas
Gas and Liquid
Fuels.
400 (Dual
Fuel)
Combustion Turbine
Natural
Gas (Unit
50MWth
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
50 (~25ppm)
30
(~15ppm
15
Distillate/
Light Fuel
Oil (Unit
50MWth)
50
30
Use of
1% or
less S
fuel
Use of
0.5% or
less S
fuel
150 (~74ppm)
100
(~50ppm
15
Boiler
Natural
Gas
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
200
180
Other
Gaseous
Fuels
50
30
400
300
240
200
Liquid
Fuels
(Plant
≥50MWth
to
<600MWt
50
30
400 –
1000
400
400
200
Liquid
Fuels
(Plant
≥600MWt
40
25
200-
600
200
400
200
Solid
Fuels
(Plant
≥50MWth
to
<600MWt
50
30
400 –
1000
400
500
200
Solid
Fuels
(Plant
≥600MWt
40
25
200-
600
200

--- Page 155 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

153
3.5.
Social standards
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘.


4. General Description of Industry Activities
Power
generation
sources
Power plant type
Description
Conventional
power
Coal/Gas/Oil
based power plant
A conventional power plant burns coal, oil, gas to
produce electricity. Mechanical power is produced by a
heat engine, which transforms thermal energy from
combustion of fossil fuel into mechanical energy.
Mechanical power is produced by a heat engine, which
transforms thermal energy from combustion of fossil
fuel into mechanical energy. A generator converts
mechanical energy into electrical energy by creating
relative motion between a magnetic field and a
conductor. The type of power plant employed depends
on the source of energy and type of energy being
produced.
Power plants can be divided based on the type of
combustion
or
gasification:
boilers,
internal
reciprocating engines, and combustion turbines.
Some common technologies for steam generation are
Conventional or Sub-critical boilers, Supercritical steam
boilers and Ultra supercritical steam boilers.

--- Page 156 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

154
18.9. ESRM Guidance Note for Pulp & Paper Sector

1. Introduction
The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM for the Pulp & Paper Sector is to provide a high
level indicative summary of summary of potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and
performance levels for transactions in the Pulp & Paper sector in Bangladesh. The scope of
application will be fully aligned with the Section 4 of Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and FIs. At
all times, applicable national regulations are to be followed. Where national regulations differ from
the levels and measures presented in this Guidance Note, loan proposals are expected to achieve
whichever is more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those provided in this
Guidance Note are appropriate, in view of specific loan proposal, a full and detailed justification for
any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This
justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of
human health and the environment. Going by the process, pulping process used by manufacturers in
Bangladesh is namely mechanical pulping & chemical pulping. Chemical pulping relies mainly on
chemical reactants and heat energy to soften and dissolve lignin in wood chips, followed by
mechanical refining to separate the fibre. Mechanical pulping often involves some pre-treatment of
wood with steam heat and/or weak chemical solution, but relies primarily on mechanical equipment
to reduce wood into fibrous material by abrasive refining or grinding. Different pulping processes
result in pulp with specific properties suited for different end uses. This Guidance Note therefore
focuses primarily on environmental and social issues associated with Pulp & Paper industry units.

2. Industry Specific Impacts and Management
2.1.
Environmental Issues:
 Wastewater
Pulp and paper manufacturing activities may generate wastewater discharges at a rate of 10-
250cubic meters permetric ton (m3/t) of product. Product is measured as air dry pulp in pulp mills,
and as weight of paper sold in paper and board mills. Pollutants present in effluent streams from
pulp and paper manufacturing include:
 Total suspended solids (TSS; mainly from cooking and pulping process screening, washing,
and bleaching stages as well as from debarking residue, chemical recovery inorganics and
fillers).
 Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) and dissolved
organic compounds mainly arising from wet debarking cooking/pulping, screening, washing,
bleaching, and chemical recovery plant liquor spills).
 Bleach plant effluents may include PCDD (poly chlorinateddibenzodioxins) and PCDF
(poly chlorinated dibenzofurans), commonly referred to as chlorinated dioxins and furans.
When Elemental Chlorine Free (ECF) or Total Chlorine Free (TCF) bleaching technologies are
used, the concentrations of dioxins and furans in the effluents are below the detection limits.
Among the sources of Nitrogen and Phosphorus compounds released into wastewaters, and
potentially contributing toeutrophication of receiving waters, is the wood raw material which is also
a source of resin acids. Resin acids, especiallythose based on coniferous wood pulp, can be toxic to
fish andbenthic invertebrates. Chlorinated phenols can be produced byelemental chlorine based

--- Page 157 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

155
bleaching of pulp. Other issues related to wastewater discharges may include fishtainting, colour
related to COD content and discharges of black liquor, pulp spills from overflowing tanks, and
runoff from log yards. This last source may contain toxic chemicals (such astannins, phenols,
resins, and fatty acids) leached from the timber, and soil and other materials washed out of the bark.
Industry-specific wastewater prevention strategies potentially applicable to most pulp and paper
manufacturing processes are presented below. Recommended wastewater prevention and
control methods include the following:
 Dry debarking of wood
 Systems for collection and recycling of temporary and accidental discharges from process
water spills
 Sufficient and balanced volumes of pulp storage, broke storage and white water storage
tanks to avoid or reduce process water discharges
 Recycling of wastewater, with or without simultaneous recovery of fibers (using filters or
flotation plants)
 Separation of contaminated and non- contaminated (clean) wastewaters with collection and
reuse of clean non-contact cooling waters and sealing waters
 Potentially contaminated storm water includes runoff from log and wood handling areas,
process equipment, building roofs and areas immediately around the mill process areas. This
should be combined with process effluent for treatment.

Table - Sources of Wastewater discharge and control techniques
Control techniques
Wastewater Management –Kraft and Sulphite Pulp Mills
Bleach plant
Oxygen delignification ahead of the bleach plant
Bleaching
Efficient washing of the pulp ahead of the bleaching
Eliminating
the
formation
of
2,3,7,8-TCDD
and 2,3,7,8-TCDF in wood and
non-wood bleaching processes
Replacement of elemental chlorine bleaching with
Elemental Chlorine Free (ECF) bleaching or total chlorine
free (TCF) bleaching
Removal of hexenuronic acids
Use of mild hydrolysis for hardwood pulp, especially
eucalyptus
Collection and recycling of spent
cooking liquor spills
Stripping and reuse of evaporation and digester condensates
in order to reduce odour producing Total Reduced Sulfur
(TRS) compounds (Kraft and Sulfite mills).

Neutralization of spent cooking
liquor before evaporation and reuse
of condensate in order to reduce
dissolved organics (Sulfite mills)

Chemical recovery in Sulfite as well as Kraft mills.
Wastewater Management – Mechanical and Chemical Mills
Minimizing reject losses
Maximizing water recirculation in mechanical pulping
process
Application
of
thickeners
to Separation of pulp mill and paper mill water systems as

--- Page 158 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

156
effectively separate water systems
from the pulp and paper mills
well as use of counter-current water system from paper to
pulp mill to reduce overall water consumption, TSS and
dissolved organics.
Wastewater Management –Paper & Integrated Mills
Recycling of white water with fibre
recovery by means of disc filters,
drum filters or micro flotation units
and minimization of the number of
fresh water intake points to the
white water system
Fiber recovery via disc filters, drum filters or micro
flotation units
Separate
treatment
of
coating
wastewaters
Separate treatment of coating wastewaters, e.g. by ultra
filtration – recycling of coating chemicals
Wastewater Treatment
Removal of suspended solids
Primary mechanical treatment (such as neutralization,
screening, and sedimentation processes)
Removal of organic content and
toxic organics
Secondary treatment (biological treatment) - The most
commonly used systems include a combination of i)
activated sludge; ii) aerated lagoons; iii) biological filters of
various types, often used in combination with other
methods; iv) anaerobic treatment used as a pre-treatment
stage, followed by an aerobic biological stage; and v)
combinations of different methods, when very high
efficiencies are necessary;
Treatment of toxic compounds
(e.g., resins, fatty acids)
Extended aeration time
Effluents high in BOD/COD & low
in toxic substances (e.g., sulfite
pulping
condensates
and
mechanical
pulping
and
RCF
effluents)
Anaerobic biological pre-treatments
 Air Emissions
The principal air emissions in pulp and paper production consist of process gases which vary by
type of pulping process and which may include sulfur compounds (with associated odor issues),
particulate matter, nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds, chlorine, carbon dioxide, and
methane. Other common sources of emissions include flue gases from incineration plants and from
auxiliary steam and power generating units emitting particulate matter, sulfur compounds and
nitrogen oxides. Exhaust stacks should be designed according to the Good International Industry
Practice (GIIP). For pulp mills, this may consist of a high single stack typically over 100 meters in
height above immediately surrounding land or as defined by atmospheric emissions dispersion
modeling.
Table - Sources of emission and control techniques
Control techniques
Process Gases – Kraft and sulfite mills
Malodorous gases - Kraft pulping Incineration

--- Page 159 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

157
processes typically emit highly
malodorous
reduced
sulfur
compounds
denoted
as
total
reduced sulfur (TRS).
High concentration gases
Stand-by incinerator system
The point of discharge of the
necessary
emergency vents to atmosphere
should be a high, hot stack, such as
the recovery or power boiler
When waste water treatment plant odors are problematic,
considering use of oxygen activated sludge with capture
and subsequent incineration of gaseous emi ssions
Recovery boilers – Kraft and sulfite mills: Emissions from recovery boilers are typically
characterized by the presence of particulate matter and sulfur dioxide. Other key constituents
include nitrogen oxides and sometimes hydrogen sulfide in kraft mills. Sulfur dioxide recovery is
considered fundamental in sulfite mills.
Oxidation of black liquor prior to
direct
contact
evaporation
(applicable to existing facilities, as
direct contact evaporators should
not be used in new facilities).
Reducing
sulfur
emissions
by
concentrating black liquor in
the evaporator (Kraft mills) above
75% dry solids before incineration
in the recovery boiler
Reducing sulfur emissions by controlling combustion
process parameters in the recovery boiler including
temperature, air supply, distribution of black liquor in the
furnace, and furnace load (Kraft mills)
Reduced emissions of nitrogen
oxides (NOx ) by control of firing
conditions (e.g. excess air)
Absorption in alkaline solution (can generate new cooking
liquor for sulphite pulp mills)
Lime Kilns – Kraft mills: The calcination reaction process results in emissions of NOx, SO2, and
particulate matter. TRS gases may also be released due to poor removal of sodium sulfide (Na2S)
from the lime mud.
Sulfur dioxide emission
Primary emissions control through sse of low sulphur
content fuel and control of excess oxygen
NOx emission
Primary emissions control through controlled firing
conditions
Hydrogen sulfide emissions
Primary emissions control through treatment of residual
sodium sulphide in the lime mud (e.g., proper lime mud
washing and filtering to remove sodium sulfide and
decrease water content (to about 20 to 30 percent) which
permits on- filter air oxidation of residual sulfide prior to
the dried mud entering the kiln)
Particulate matter emissions
Electrostatic precipitators
Residual sulfur dioxide emissions
Use of secondary SO2 emissions controls such as alkaline
wet scrubbers for removal of acid gases and by-products of
the incineration of TRS gases

--- Page 160 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

158
Volatile Organic Compounds – All types of mills: Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are
emitted to the atmosphere from poorly designed utility boilers burning bark and other wood-
based fuel. At mechanical pulping mills, principal sources of VOC emissions include evacuation
of air from wood-chip washing and from the condensing shower, where steam released in
mechanical pulping processes, contaminated with volatile wood components, is condensed. The
concentrations of VOCs depend on the resin content of the wood and the specific defiberizing
techniques applied.
VOC emissions
 In addition to the guidance for malodorous emissions,
above, recover VOCs in the heat recovery units and the
start-up scrubber, and collect and further treat volatile
compounds
 Operating bark boilers with excess oxygen sufficient to
prevent VOC (and CO) emissions while minimizing
formation of NOx. Fluidized bed technology is
preferred for solid waste boilers
Combustion Sources: Pulp and paper mills are large energy and steam consumers sometimes
making use of auxiliary boilers (bark boilers and additional steam boilers) for the generation of
steam energy.
Emissions related to the operation of these steam energy sources typically consists of combustion
by-products such as NOx, SOx, PM, and volatile organic compounds (VOCs), and greenhouse
gases. Recommended management strategies include adoption of a combined strategy which
includes a reduction in energy demand, use of cleaner fuels, and application of emissions controls
where required. In energy efficient non-integrated pulp mills, the heat generated from black
liquor and bark combustion should exceed the energy requirement for the entire production
process.
Reducing heat losses and heat
consumption by increasing dry
solids content of bark which is
burnt; increasing efficiency of
steam
boilers
(e.g.
use
of
economizers
Increasing effectiveness of the secondary heating system
(e.g. hot water about 85 °C)
Increasing use of secondary heat to
heat buildings
Increasing high pulp concentration, as well as maintaining a
tightly closed water system and a partially closed bleaching
plant
Reducing
electric
power
consumption by maintaining as
high a pulp consistency as possible
in
screening
and
cleaning;
controlling the speed of large
motors rather than using throttling
valves or dampers for flow control;
using efficient vacuum pumps; and
proper sizing of pipes, pumps
and fans
Maximizing
the
generation
of
electric
power
by
maintaining
high boiler pressure; keeping outlet steam pressure in the
back-pressure turbine as low as technically feasible; using
a condensing turbine for power production from excess
steam and maintaining high turbine efficiency; and
preheating of air and fuel charged to boilers

--- Page 161 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

159
 Residues and Waste
Pulp and paper mills typically generate significant quantities of non-hazardous solid wastes but
very little hazardous wastes. Industry specific wastes include bark from debarking of wood, residual
pith from bagasse pulping, inorganic sludge (e.g. green liquor sludge, lime sludge) from chemical
recovery, trash (e.g. plastics) separated from paper/card in RCF plants, and fiber(i.e., primary
clarifier) sludge and biological sludge from wastewater treatment. A small amount of hazardous
waste is generated in all mills, and includes oil and grease residues, scrap electrical equipment, and
chemical residues which normally amount to about 0.5-1kg/ton of product. The classification of
solid wastes as hazardous or non-hazardous should be established based on local regulatory criteria.
Hazardous and non-hazardous wastes should be carefully segregated to reduce the volume of
wastes that could be contaminated with hazardous material and hence classified as hazardous.The
applicability of sludge management methods depends on the actual quality and type of sludge. The
table below demonstrates this concept through examples.
Table -Sources of Residues or Waste and control techniques
Section:
Control techniques
Fibre Sludge
Recycling, incineration & land filling or can be used by
other mills, or sent off-site for use in other products
Debarking waste
Clean wood handling, segregation & land filling
Deinking sludge
Filler in other paper grades or can be used for preparation
of soil products or Incinerated
Bark ash, wood ash and other ashes
 Recycling & land filling
 Incineration in a bark boiler or separate incinerator is
feasible only for sludge with relatively high contents
of organics and high contents of dry solids
Lime mud
Recycling, liming of acid soils & land filling
Green liquor sludge
Land filling after improved dewatering or can be used as
forest fertilizer or as a neutralization agent for acidic
wastewater;
Pith
Composting with other organic materials for preparation
of soil products or else incinerated. Composting is feasible
only
for sludge with high contents of organics
Biological sludge
 Composting
with
other
organic
materials
for
preparation of soil products or else incinerated.
 Incineration in the recovery boiler is typically only
applicable for biological sludge in Kraft mills
Tertiary treatment sludge
Composting with other organic materials for preparation
of soil products or blended with other sludge for
incineration in the bark boiler. Sludge from a waste
treatment plant needs to be evaluated on a case-by -case
basis to establish whether it constitutes a hazardous or a
non-hazardous waste and its potential impacts from land
application

--- Page 162 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

160
 Noise
Pulp and paper mills are inherently noisy due to the large amount of mechanical equipment,
transport vehicles, physical activities, and energy usage, notably vacuum pumps, liquid pumps and
steam generation systems.
2.2.
Health and Safety Issues:
The occupational health and safety impact of Pulp & Paper manufacturing projects are primarily
associated with dust, gases, fumes, noise and vibrations. The table below is a list of commonly
observed hazards in the Pulp & Paper sector and its mitigation measures.
Table -Common Occupational Health hazards
Hazard
Description
Mitigation Measures
Chemical
hazards
 Numerous chemicals are used
and manufactured in the pulp and
paper industry that can have
adverse
impacts
on
worker
health and safety. These include:
Gases—such as reduced sulfur
compounds
(kraft
pulping),oxidized
sulfur
compounds,
mainly
sulfur
dioxide
(kraft
and
sulfite
pulping),
chlorine,
chlorine
dioxide,
terpenes
and
other
volatile organic compounds, and
oxygen;
Liquids—including
sodium
hydroxide and other caustics,
acids such as sulfuric acid,
cooking byproducts such as
turpentine,
sodium hypochlorite, aqueous
solution of chlorine dioxide,
hydrogen
peroxide,
biocides,
papermaking additives, solvents,
and dyes and inks; and
Solids—including
sodium
chlorate, sodium sulfate, lime,
calcium carbonate, ash, and
asbestos (used for insulation).
 Automate
pulping
bleaching
operations
 Provide engineering controls
 Install continuous gas monitors with
alarms.
 Maintain a current database of all
chemicals used and manufactured in
the mill
 All chemicals used or manufactured at
the site should be reviewed for
reactivity
with
other
classes
of
chemicals used at the facility;
 Label, mark, package and store all
chemicals and hazardous materials
according
to
national
and
internationally
recognized
requirements and standards;
 Ensure contractor personnel, including
maintenance
contractors
retained
during shutdowns, are trained in and
follow site safety procedures, including
use of personal protective equipment
and handling of chemicals;
 Train workers in handling of chlorine
dioxide and sodium chlorate. Wet
sodium chlorate spills with water and
keep any contaminated clothing wet
until laundered;
 Avoid the use of elemental chlorine for
bleaching;
 Keep sulfur storage bins free of sulfur
dust accumulation;
 Implement
an
inspection
and
maintenance program to prevent and

--- Page 163 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

161
identify leaks, equipment failure, etc.
 Use water-based (rather than solvent-
based) inks and dyes

Physical
hazards
 The most severe injuries in this
sector are often attributable to
the failure of lockout -tagout
systems.
 Machine Safety
 Logging Activities
 Confined Spaces: Operation and
especially
maintenance
work
may include confined space
entry. Examples include: boilers,
dryers,
degreasers,
digesters,
blow pits, pipeline pits, process
and reaction vessels, tanks, and
vats. Impacts and mitigation.
 Install catch platforms under conveyors
that cross passageways or roadways;
 Quickly clean up spills;
 Use non-skid walking surfaces that
allow drainage;
 Install
guard
rails
on
walkways
adjacent to production lines or at
height, and clearly mark traffic lanes
for vehicles an pedestrians;
 Equip mobile equipment with roll-over
protection.
 Establish routines to ensure that heavy
loads are not moved by crane over
personnel
 Equipment with moving parts should
be fitted with safety guards or
interlocks capable of preventing access
to moving parts
 Equipment must be shut off and locked
out before maintenance, cleaning, or
repairs are undertaken;
 Workers should be trained specifically
in the safe use of debarking, chipping,
and other equipment;
 Work stations should be aligned to
minimize
human
danger
from
fragments which could arise from
breakage;
 Equipment
should
be
regularly
inspected and maintained to prevent
equipment failure;
 All
personnel
operating
cutting
equipment
should
use
protective
eyewear, and other PPE as necessary.
 Establish and follow safety practices
for unloading logs, lumber and chips.
 Complete mechanization of log yard
activities should be considered to
reduce human contact with logs during
handling and stacking activities;

--- Page 164 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

162
 Transport routes within log yards
should be clearly demarcated and
vehicle movement should be closely
controlled;
 Log stacks should not be higher than a
safe height defined by risk assessment
which should take account of site-
specific
circumstances
including
stacking methodology;
 Access to log yards should be restricted
to authorized personnel;
 Log decks should have stops, chains, or
other guards to prevent logs from
rolling down and off the deck;
 Workers should be trained in safe
working procedures in log stack and
deck areas, including avoidance of
falling logs and planning of escape
routes;
 Workers should be provided with
protective steel capped boots, hardhats,
and high visibility jackets;
 All mobile equipment should have
audible reversing alarms.
 Impacts and mitigation measures for
confined space entry are addressed.
Respiratory
Hazard
 Exposure to wood dust is a
potential concern in the wood
handling area of pulp mills (e.g.
in semi-mechanized chippers),as
well as in the initial stages of
pulping.
Exposure
to
fibre
dustcan occurs in paper mills.
Paper fibre dust is also a fire
hazard.

 Enclose and ventilate saws, shredders,
dusters, and woodchip conveyors;
 Consider enclosed chip storage;
 Avoid use of compressed air to clear
wood dust and wastepaper;
 Enclose and ventilate areas where dry,
dusty additives are unloaded, weighed,
and mixed, or use additives in liquid
form;
 Regularly inspect and clean dusty areas
to minimize dust explosion risk.
Biological
Exposure
 Biological
agents
include
microorganisms such as bacteria,
fungi and viruses, some of which
may
be
pathogenic.
Microorganisms
develop
particularly in paper machines‘
closed-loop systems, biological
 Design biological treatment plants to
minimize the potential for growth of
pathogenic organisms;
 Use biocides in cooling water and in
pulping and paper making processes to
minimize growth of microorganisms.

--- Page 165 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

163
treatment
plants
for
mill
wastewaters, and water cooling
towers.
Heat
Exposure
 Many
pulping
operations,
including pulp cooking, pulping
chemical
recovery,
lime
production, and paper drying
involve high temperatures and, in
some cases, high pressures.
 Provide air-conditioned control rooms,
including
in
wood
preparation,
pulping, bleaching, and paper-making
areas;
 Schedule work in hot areas to allow
acclimatization and rest periods;
 Automate smelt removal from the
chemical recovery boiler. Provide
heavy-duty
protective
clothing
to
workers potentially exposed to molten
smelt
or
other
high-temperature
materials.
 Implement
safety
procedures
to
minimize the potential for smelt/water
explosions.
 Consider use of mobile equipment with
air-conditioned enclosed cabs.
Exposure to radiation: Certain measurement equipment, particularly in paper mills, contains
radioactive material. These units are typically sealed, but damage to or maintenance of devices
containing radioactive material may result in exposure. These devices should be designed and
operated according to applicable national requirements and internationally accepted standards for
occupational and/or natural exposure to ionizing radiation, such as ―International Basic Safety
Standard for protection against Ionizing Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation Sources‖ and its
three interrelated Safety Guides.

Structural safety is a serious safety concern in the industrial buildings of Bangladesh. There have
also been incidents in the pulp and paper sector involving the collapse of factory buildings which
have resulted in fatalities The lack of structural safety in the industrial buildings can also increase
the risk of fire and electrical hazards. Table 8, below, provides a list of structural, fire, and electrical
hazards observed in the pulp and paper sector and related prevention and mitigation measures.

Table - Common Safety Issues in Bangladesh
Area
Issues commonly observed
Prevention and Mitigation Measures
Structural
Highly
stressed
columns;
undocumented
vertical
extensions; localised areas of
high
loads
in
buildings;
discrepancy
between
structural drawing and built
structure; minor to major
cracks in structural elements.
 Compliance
to
regulatory
requirements
including the Bangladesh National Building
Code (BNBC) (2015) or international codes,
such as those compiled by the International
Code Council (ICC), (2006).
 Undertake periodic structural safety audits by
accredited agencies.
Fire
Inadequate,
untested
fire  Compliance with the by-laws of the Fire

--- Page 166 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

164
alarms;
inadequate
exit
capacity compared to the
occupancy load; lack of exit
signage.
Regulation (2014), part of the Bangladesh
Labor
(Amendment)
Act
(2013),
which
includes requirements regarding the formation
of a safety committees, and other measures such
as emergency exits, access to stairs, and
provision of personal protective equipment
(PPE).
 Provisions for fire hydrants as per the
requirements of BNBC (2015) and by Fire
Regulation 2014, including water supply
specifications according to the building size /
hazard.
 Undertake regular fire audits by accredited
agencies, with mock drills to be conducted on a
periodic basis as per the fire hazard assessment
of the facility.
Electrical
Unsealed entry
and exit
points for electrical cable;
excessive dust deposit on
cables; cables laid on floor
without guarding/protection;
oil leaks in generator room;
inadequate cable grounding.
 Undertake electrical safety assessment on a
periodic basis, and ensure workers are trained
and provided with appropriate PPE based on the
risk assessment.

2.3.
Community Health & Safety:
Common health and safety impacts on the community during the construction, operation, and
decommissioning of cement manufacturing facilities include:
 Chemical storage, use, and transport
 Odours
 Traffic
2.4.
Social Issues
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘


3. Performance Indicators and Monitoring
3.1.
Energy and water consumption
Mill type
Reported ranges
Water
Consumption
(m3/t)a
Heat
Energy
(GJ/t)

Electrical
Energy
(kWh/t)
Kraft Pulping, bleached
20 – 100b
10 - 14
600 – 1200i
Sulfite Pulping (magnesium base)
40-100


Mechanical Pulping- Groundwood
5 – 15

1100 – 2200c
Mechanical Pulping-TMP
4 – 10

1800 – 3600d

--- Page 167 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

165
Mechanical Pulping—CTMP
15 - 50

1000 – 4300e
Recovered Paper Mill—Uncoated Folding
Boxboard
2 – 10


Recovered Paper Mill—Coated Folding Boxboard
7-15


Recovered Paper Mill—Corrugated Medium and
Packaging Paper
1.5-10


Recovered Paper Mill—Newsprint
10-20


Recovered Paper Mill—Tissue
5 – 100c


Recovered Paper Mill—Writing and Printing Paper
7 - 20


Paper Mill—Tissue
10 – 50f

500 – 3000
Paper Mill—Printing and Writing Paper, Uncoated
5 – 40g

500 – 650
Paper Mill—Printing and Writing Paper, Coated
5 – 50g

650 - 900
Paper Mill—Paper Board
0 – 20h

~550 - 680
Paper Mill—Specialty Paper
10-300


3.2.
Emission Guidelines for Pulp and Paper Facilities
Parameter
Type of mill
Units
Guideline value
Total Suspended
Particulate
Kraft, bleached
kg/ADt
0.5

Kraft, unbleached—
Integrated
kg/ADt
0.5

Sulfite, integrated and non-
integrated
kg/ADt
0.15
SO2 as S
Kraft, bleached
kg/ADt
0.4

Kraft, unbleached
kg/ADt
0.4

Sulfite, integrated and non-
integrated
kg/ADt
1.0
NOx as NO2
Kraft, bleached
kg/ADt
1.5 for hardwood pulp
2.0 for softwood pulp

Kraft, unbleached-integrated
kg/ADt
1.5 for hardwood pulp
2.0 for softwood pulp

Sulfite, integrated and non-
integrated
kg/ADt
2.0
Total Reduced
Sulfur compounds
Kraft, bleached
kg/ADt
0.2

Kraft, unbleached-integrated
kg/ADt
0.2
Note: Kg/ADt = kilograms of pollutant per 1,000 kg of air dry pulp


3.3.
Effluent Guidelines for pulp and paper facilities-Unbleached Kraft Pulp,
Integrated
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
Flowa
m3/ADt
25
pH

6-9
6-9(across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water,
public sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
1.0
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated
land)
COD
kg/ADt
10
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system

--- Page 168 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

166
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated
land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
0.7
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated
land)
Total N
kg/ADt
0.2b
100 (across all locations)
Total P
kg/ADt
0.02
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)
* The National Standards are corresponding to large plant with production capacity of above 50
tons per day.

3.4.
Effluent Guidelines for pulp and paper facilities-Bleached Kraft Pulp, Integrated
Paramete
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
pH

6-9
6-9(across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water, public
sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
1.5
150 (Inland surface water)500 (Public Sewerage system connected
to treatment at second stage)200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
20
200 (Inland surface water)400 (Public Sewerage system connected
to treatment at second stage)400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
50 (Inland surface water)250 (Public Sewerage system connected
to treatment at second stage)100 (Irrigated land)
AOX
kg/ADt
0.25
Total N
kg/ADt
0.2b

100 (across all locations)
Total P
kg/ADt
0.03
8 (Inland surface water)8 (Public Sewerage system connected to
treatment at second stage)15 (Irrigated land)
* The National Standards are corresponding to small plant with production capacity of less than 50 tons per day.

3.5.
Effluent Guidelines for Sulfite Pulp and Paper Facilities—Sulfite Pulp, Integrated
and Non-Integrated
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
Flowa
m3/AD
55d

pH

6-9
6-9(across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water, public
sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
2.0
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
30c
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
2.0
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system connected
to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated land)
AOX
kg/ADt
0.05
Total N
kg/ADt
0.5
100 (across all locations)

--- Page 169 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

167
Total P
kg/ADt
0.05
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system connected to
treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)
3.6.
Effluent Guidelines for CTMP Facilities
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Flowa
m3/ADt
20
pH

6-9
6-9(across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water,
public sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
1.0
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
1.0
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated land)
Total N
kg/ADt
0.5
100 (across all locations)
Total P
kg/ADt
0.05
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)
3.7.
Effluent Guidelines for pulp and paper facilities-Mechanical Pulping, Integrated
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
pH

6-9
6-9 (across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water,
public sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
0.5
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
5.0
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
0.5
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated land)
AOX
kg/ADt
0.005
Total N
kg/ADt
0.05
100 (across all locations)
Total P
kg/ADt
0.005
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)
3.8.
Effluent Guidelines for Pulp and Paper Facilities—Recycled Fibre, without
Deinking, Integrated
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
Flowa
m3/ADt
10
pH

6-9
6-9 (across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water,
public sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
0.15
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
1.5
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
0.15
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system

--- Page 170 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

168
connected to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated land)
AOX
kg/ADt
0.005
Total N
kg/ADt
0.5
100 (across all locations)
Total P
kg/ADt
0.005
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)
3.9.
Effluent Guidelines for Pulp and Paper Facilities—Recycled Fibre, with
Deinking, Integrated
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
Flowa
m3/ADt
15
pH

6-9
6-9 (across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water,
public sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
0.3
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
4.0
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
0.2
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated land)
AOX
kg/ADt
0.005
Total N
kg/ADt
0.1
100 (across all locations)
Total P
kg/ADt
0.01
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)

3.10.
Effluent Guidelines for Pulp and Paper Facilities—Recycled Fiber Tissue Mills

3.11.
Effluent Guidelines for Pulp and Paper Facilities—Uncoated Fine Paper Mills
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Flowa
m3/ADt
25
pH

6-9
6-9 (across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water,
public sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
0.4
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
4.0
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
0.5
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated land)
AOX
kg/ADt
0.005
Total N
kg/ADt
0.25
100 (across all locations)
Total P
kg/ADt
0.015
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Flowa
m3/ADt
25

--- Page 171 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

169

3.12.
Effluent Guidelines for Pulp and Paper Facilities—Coated Fine Paper Mills

3.13.
Effluent Guidelines for pulp and paper facilities-Tissue Mills
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Flowa
kg/ADt
25 k
pH

6-9
6-9 (across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water,
public sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
0.4
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
1.5
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
0.4
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated land)
AOX
kg/ADt
0.01
Total N
kg/ADt
0.25
100 (across all locations)
pH

6-9
6-9 (across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water,
public sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
0.4
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
2.0
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
0.25
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated land)
AOX
kg/ADt
0.005
Total N
kg/ADt
0.2
100 (across all locations)
Total P
kg/ADt
0.01
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Flowa
m3/ADt
25
pH

6-9
6-9 (across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water,
public sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
0.4
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
1.5
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
0.25
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated land)
AOX
kg/ADt
0.005
Total N
kg/ADt
0.2
100 (across all locations)
Total P
kg/ADt
0.01
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)

--- Page 172 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

170
Total P
kg/ADt
0.015
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)

3.14.
Effluent Guidelines for pulp and paper facilities-Fibre Preparation, Non-Wood
Parameter
Units
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards
Flowa
kg/ADt
50
pH

6-9
6-9 (across all discharge locations i.e. inland surface water,
public sewer and irrigated land)
TSS
kg/ADt
2.0
150 (Inland surface water) 500 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 200 (Irrigated land)
COD
kg/ADt
30
200 (Inland surface water) 400 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 400 (Irrigated land)
BOD5
kg/ADt
2.0
50 (Inland surface water) 250 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 100 (Irrigated land)
AOX
kg/ADt
2.0
Total N
kg/ADt
0.5
100 (across all locations)
Total P
kg/ADt
0.05
8 (Inland surface water) 8 (Public Sewerage system
connected to treatment at second stage) 15 (Irrigated land)

3.15.
Social standards
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘.


4. General Description of Industry Activities
Sector Activity
Sub-sector Activities
Raw Material
Preparation
Wood is the predominant source of cellulose fiber for paper products,
although other fiber sources, such as straw, bagasse, and bamboo, are used in
areas with limited access to forest resources, especially in developing
countries.
Pulping
Processes
In the pulping process, the raw cellulose-bearing material (raw plant material
or recycled paper) is broken down into its individual fibers, known as pulp.
Pulping processes are generally categorized as :
 Chemical
 Mechanical
Chemical pulping relies mainly on chemical reactants and heat energy to
soften and dissolve lignin in wood chips, followed by mechanical refining to
separate the fibers.
Mechanical pulping often involves some pre-treatment of wood with steam
heat and/or weak chemical solution, but relies primarily on mechanical
equipment to reduce wood into fibrous material by abrasive refining or
grinding. Different pulping processes result in pulp with specific properties
suited for different end uses.
Kraft Pulping
In the Kraft pulping process, wood chips are combined in a digester with

--- Page 173 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

171
white liquor, an aqueous solution comprising principally sodium sulfide
(Na2S) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH), which breaks down lignin and, to a
lesser extent, hemicelluloses under elevated temperature and elevated
pressure, freeing the cellulose fibers (pulp). Following digestion, the resulting
black liquor, which contains dissolved organic substances, is separated from
the pulp, called brown stock. The brown stock is treated with oxygen in the
presence of sodium hydroxide to remove some of the residual lignin in a
process referred to as oxygen delignification. The brown stock is then
bleached, as described below, to achieve desired brightness, strength, and
purity of the final pulp product.
Bleaching
Bleaching is any process that chemically alters pulp to increase its brightness.
Bleached pulps create papers that are whiter, brighter, softer, and more
absorbent than unbleached pulps. Bleached pulps are used for products where
high purity is required and yellowing is not desired (e.g. printing and writing
papers). Unbleached pulp is typically used to produce boxboard, linerboard,
and grocery bags.
Papermaking
After pulping (and bleaching, if applicable), the finished pulp is processed into
the stock used for paper manufacture. Market pulp, which is to be shipped off-
site to paper or paperboard mills, is simply dried and baled during this step.
Processing of pulp in integrated mills includes pulp blending specific to the
desired paper product desired, dispersion in water, beating and
Refining to add density and strength, and addition of any necessary wet
additives. Wet additives are used to create.

--- Page 174 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

172
18.10. ESRM Guidance Note for Steel Re-rolling Sector

1. Introduction
The objective of this Guidance Note on ESRM for the Steel Re-rolling Sector is to provide a high
level indicative summary of summary of potential environmental and social (E&S) risks and
performance levels for transactions in the Steel Re-rolling sector in Bangladesh. The scope of
application will be fully aligned with the Section 4 of Guidelines on ESRM for Banks and FIs. At
all times, applicable national regulations are to be followed. Where national regulations differ from
the levels and measures presented in this Guidance Note, loan proposals are expected to achieve
whichever is more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than those provided in this
Guidance Note are appropriate, in view of specific loan proposal, a full and detailed justification for
any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This
justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective of
human health and the environment. For the purposes of this Guidance Note, Steel re-rolling units
activities include, but are not limited to:1.Steel Melting Works (SMW), 2.Steel Re-rolling Mills
(SRRM).

2. Industry Specific Impacts and Management
2.1.
Environmental Issues:
 Air emissions
A steel re-rolling mill releases significant amount of particulates matter, sulphur dioxide, oxides of
nitrogen, VOC and PAH, Fluorides, Chlorides, heavy metals, carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide
to the air during operations.
Table - Sources of Air Emissions and Mitigation Measures
Emissions
Sources
Mitigation Measures
Particulate matter
(PM)
 Sources include melting and
refining activities (BF, BOF,
EAF)
and
heating
furnaces
(depending of type of fuels used);
mechanical actions (e.g. scarfing
and grinding); and handling of
materials (e.g. raw materials,
additive, recycled and waste
materials,
and
by-products).
Additional sources of particulate
matter (PM) emissions include
coal
storage,
conveying,
charging, coking, pushing, and
quenching.
 Use of primary controls for the
flue gas of the BOF, including
venturi scrubbers with or without
complete combustion techniques
 Installation of secondary controls
to capture off-gas escaping from
the BOF process
 Encapsulation of metal pouring
lines with fitted extractors in BOF
 Quick cooling of gas followed by
bag filters in EAF. The bag filters
can be primed with absorbents
(e.g. lime or carbon) to further
capture volatile impurities
 Use of direct off-gas extraction
and canopy hood enclosures and
cleaning in EAF
VOC and PAH
 Volatile
organic
compounds  Pre-treat mill scales through such

--- Page 175 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

173
(VOC) and polynuclear aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH) may be
emitted from various stages in
steel manufacturing
practices as pressure washing to
reduce oil content
 Optimize
operation
practices,
particularly
combustion
and
temperature controls
 Minimize oil input via dust and
mill scale through use of ―good
housekeeping‖ techniques in the
rolling mill
 Use
of
advanced
emission
collection and demisting systems
(e.g. precoated bag filters)
 Recirculation of off-gas
 Treat the captured off-gas through
post
combustion,
chemical
scrubbing, or biofiltration
Carbon
monoxide
 Sources of carbon monoxide
(CO) include waste gases from
the BOF, BF and EAF. CO is
generated from the oxidation of
the graphite electrodes and the
carbon from the metal bath
during
melting
and
refining
phases in EAFs.
 Full capture of off-gases BF and
BOF
 Recycling gases containing CO
 Use of foamy slag practices in
EAF process
Nitrogen oxides
 Nitrogen
oxides
(NOX)
emissions are caused by high
furnace temperature and the
oxidation of nitrogen.
 Application
of
waste
gas
recirculation
 Use of oven batteries with multi-
stage air supply systems
 Adoption
of
suppressed
combustion in BOF
Sulphur Dioxides  The SO2 emission level in waste
gases
from
reheating
and
annealing furnaces depends on
the
sulphur-content
in
the
available fuel.
 Selection of raw feedstocks with
low sulphur content
 Minimizing the sulphur content of
the fuel
 Addition of absorbents such as
hydrated lime [Ca(OH)2], calcium
oxide (CaO), or fly ashes with high
CaO content injected into the
exhaust gas outlet before filtration
 Installation of gas wet scrubbing
systems in dedicated collecting
and dedusting system
Chlorides
and
Fluorides
 HF and HCl may arise from off
gas
in
the
EAF
process,
 Use of dry dedusting or wet
scrubbing techniques, which are

--- Page 176 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

174
depending on the quality of the
scrap charged.
also typically installed to control
particulate matter and sulphur
oxide emissions respectively
 Control the input of chlorine via
raw
materials
through
the
materials selection process
 Avoid spraying with sea water
Heavy metals
 Heavy metals may be present in
off gas fumes from thermal
processes. The amount of metal
emissions
depends
on
the
particular process type and on the
composition of raw materials
(iron ore and scrap). Particulates
from BF, BOF, and EAF may
contain zinc (which has the
highest emission factor in EAFs,
particularly if galvanized steel
scrap is used); cadmium; lead;
nickel; mercury; manganese; and
chromium
 Metal particulate emissions should
be controlled with high-efficiency
dust abatement techniques applied
to particulate emissions control as
discussed above.
 Gaseous
metal
emissions
are
typically controlled through the
cooling of gases followed by bag
filters
Dioxins
and
Furans
 Olychlorinated
dibenzodioxin
and dibenzofuran (dioxins and
furans or PCDD/F) emissions.
PCDD/F may be produced if
chloride
ions,
chlorinated
compounds,
organic
carbon,
catalysts, oxygen, and certain
temperature
levels
exist
simultaneously
in
the
metallurgical process. Another
potential
PCDD/F
emissions
source is off-gas in the EAF. The
potential
presence
of
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB),
PVC, and other organics in the
scrap
input
(shredded
scrap
mainly
obtained
from
old
equipment) may be a source of
concern, due to its high potential
for PCDD/F formation.
 Use of clean scrap for melting
 Use of post combustion of the
EAF
off
gas
to
achieve
temperatures above 1200°C, and
maximizing residence time at this
temperature.
The
process
is
completed with a rapid quenching
to minimize time in the dioxin
reformation temperature range
 Use of oxygen injection to ensure
complete combustion
 Injection of additive powders (e.g.
activated carbons) into the gas
stream to adsorb dioxins before the
dust removal by filtration (with
subsequent
treatment
as
hazardous waste)
 Installation of fabric filters with
catalytic oxidation systems

--- Page 177 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

175
 Wastewater
Effluent streams normally present in the sector include cooling water, stormwater, rinse water, and
several different process effluent streams. Process effluents are mainly generated from blow down
from cooling system, degassing process, gas scrubbers, descaling etc. which mainly contains, pH,
TDS, SS, oil & grease etc. From pickling and cleaning, major sources of wastewater effluents are
the acid pickling rinse water and acid fume scrubber, acid regeneration plant scrubber, and alkaline
cleaning. The largest volume of wastewater derives from rinsing, whereas the most significant
contamination load comes from the continuous or batch exchange of pickle baths. The wastewater
effluents contain suspended solids, oil and grease, metals and acids. Recommended techniques to
prevent effluent from pickling plants include the following:
Install acid recovery and recycling unit;
Reduce effluent volume and minimize contaminant loading of the waste streams through
optimization of the pickling process;
Apply counter flow cascading and, in some cases, recycling of acid-pickling rinse water
discharges to the acid regeneration plant.
In the rolling process, effluent from scale removal contains suspended solids and emulsified oil, in
addition to coarse scale. Treatment of effluent includes a sedimentation basin in which solids,
mainly iron oxides, are allowed to settle at the bottom of the basin and the oil pollutants on the
surface are removed by means of skimmers and discharged to collecting basins. Cooling water from
rolling processes should be collected and treated prior to reuse. Other techniques for treating
industrial process wastewater in this sector include source segregation and pre-treatment of
wastewater streams for (i) reduction in ammonia using air stripping, (ii) reduction in toxic organics,
such as phenols using biological treatment and (iii) reduction in heavy metals using chemical
precipitation, coagulation and flocculation, etc. Typical wastewater treatment steps include oil
water separators or dissolved air floatation for separation of oils and floatable solids; filtration for
separation of filterable solids; flow and load equalization; sedimentation for suspended solids
reduction using clarifiers; dewatering and disposal of residuals in designated hazardous waste
landfills. Additional engineering controls may be required for (i) advanced metals removal using
membrane filtration or other physical/chemical treatment technologies, (ii) removal of recalcitrant
organics using activated carbon or advanced chemical oxidation, and (iv) reduction in effluent
toxicity using appropriate technology (such as reverse osmosis, ion exchange, activated carbon,
etc.). Wastewater treatment methods typically include coagulation / flocculation / precipitation
using lime or sodium hydroxide; pH correction / neutralization; sedimentation / filtration / flotation
and oil separation; and activated carbons. Cooling water is normally recycled within the process.
Rinse water may contain suspended solids, dust, lubricating oil, and other pollutants depending on
the process. Contaminated streams should be routed to the treatment system for industrial process
wastewater. Contaminated stormwater may result from coal, coke and other material storage areas.
Soil surrounding outdoor coal storage areas may be impacted by highly acidic leachate containing
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and heavy metals. Industry-specific recommendations
include:
Store scrap and other materials, (e.g. coke and coal) under cover and / or in bunded area to
limit contamination of stormwater and collect drainage
Pave process areas, segregate contaminated and non-contaminated stormwater, and
implement spill control plans. Route stormwater from process areas into the wastewater
treatment unit

--- Page 178 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

176
Design leachate collection system and location of coal storage facilities to prevent impacts
to soil and water resources. Coal stockpile areas should be paved to segregate potentially
contaminated stormwater for pre-treatment and treatment in the wastewater treatment unit
 Solid waste
Solid wastes from this industry primarily include slag. Other solid wastes include sludge from
effluent treatment and dust from dry dust collectors. Dust may contain dioxins and furans due to
largely external (dirty) scrap consumption. The steel skulls are usually recycled, and other solid
wastes are recycled, when appropriate, or disposed of in a landfill site. Slag residues may be sold as
by-products (e.g. slag from BF or from BOF for use in civil engineering, road construction, and in
the cement industry). EAFs produce a significant amount of slag. Where reuse of EAF slag is not
financially or technically feasible, it should be disposed of, along with the dust from the treatment
of off-gas, in a landfill designed with consideration of slag and dust characteristics. Local
geological conditions also should be considered when locating slag heaps. Pickling acid
regeneration sludge can be recycled in steel plants (EAF and blast furnace) or processed for the
production of iron oxides. The iron oxide from hydrochloride acid regeneration can be used in
several industries as a high quality input (e.g. production of ferromagnetic materials, iron powder,
or construction material, pigments, glass and ceramics).Metallic waste and by-products from rolling
and finishing operations (e.g. scarfing scale, dusts from scarfing, rolling mill scale, water treatment
and mill scale sludge, grinding sludge, and oil/greases) should be reused in the process. Some by-
products (e.g oily mill scale and grinding sludge from water treatment plants), should be
conditioned before internal recycling, such as reduction of oil content and depending on process
requirements. Sludge from wastewater treatment may contain heavy metals (e.g chromium, lead,
zinc, and nickel) and oil and grease. Part of the sludge from wastewater treatment may be internally
recycled or else deposited in special landfills. Sludge reuse may require a pretreatment stage, which
typically consists of pressing, drying, and granulation.
 Noise
Steel Mills generate noise from various sources including scrap and product handling; waste or by-
product gas fans; process cooling and draft fans; rotating equipment in general; dedusting systems;
furnace charging; EAF melting processes; fuel burners; cutting activities; wire rod pay-off units;
and transport and ventilation systems. Recommended techniques to reduce, prevent, and control
noise include the following:
Enclose the process buildings and / or insulate structures
Cover and enclose scrap and plate / slab storage and handling areas
Enclose fans, insulate ventilation pipes, and use dampers
Adopt foaming slag practice in EAFs
Limitation of scrap handling and transport during night time, where required
2.2.
Health and Safety Issues
Occupational health and safety issues during the construction, operation, maintenance, and
decommissioning of Steel re-rolling mills include physical hazards, heat, radiation, dust, chemical
hazards, electrical hazards, noise, entrapment hazards, moving equipment, suspended loads,
working at heights fire and explosions.

--- Page 179 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

177
Table - Common Structural, Fire & Electrical Safety Issues in Bangladesh
Area
Issues commonly observed
Prevention and Mitigation Measures
Structural Highly
stressed
columns;
undocumented
vertical
extensions; localised areas of
high
loads
in
buildings;
discrepancy
between
structural drawing and built
structure; minor to major
cracks in structural elements.
 Compliance
to
regulatory
requirements
including the Bangladesh National Building
Code (BNBC) (2015) or international codes,
such as those compiled by the International
Code Council (ICC), (2006).
 Undertake periodic structural safety audits by
accredited agencies.
Fire
Inadequate,
untested
fire
alarms;
inadequate
exit
capacity compared to the
occupancy load; lack of exit
signage.
 Compliance with the by-laws of the Fire
Regulation (2014), part of the Bangladesh Labor
(Amendment) Act (2013), which includes
requirements regarding the formation of a safety
committees, and other measures such as
emergency exits, access to stairs, and provision
of personal protective equipment (PPE).
 Provisions for fire hydrants as per the
requirements of BNBC (2015) and by Fire
Regulation
2014,
including
water
supply
specifications according to the building size /
hazard.
 Undertake regular fire audits by accredited
agencies, with mock drills to be conducted on a
periodic basis as per the fire hazard assessment
of the facility.
Electrical
Unsealed entry and exit
points for electrical cable;
excessive dust deposit on
cables; cables laid on floor
without guarding/protection;
oil leaks in generator room;
inadequate cable grounding.
 Undertake electrical safety assessment on a
periodic basis, and ensure workers are trained
and provided with appropriate PPE based on the
risk assessment.
Table - Common Occupational Health Issues
Hazard
Description
Mitigation Measures
Physical
Handling of large and heavy raw
materials
and
product,
heavy
mechanical transport, grinding and
cutting activities, rolling processes
and work at heights
High temperatures can cause fatigue
and dehydration
Handling of liquid metal may result in
explosions causing melt run out and
 Clear signage in all transport corridors
and working areas
 Appropriate
design
and layout
of
facilities to avoid crossover of different
activities and flow of processes
 Implementation
of
specific
load
handling and lifting procedures, including:
 Description of load to be lifted
(dimensions, weight, position of centre

--- Page 180 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

178
burns
Noise pollution from blower plants,
oxygen plants, gas-discharge blowers
and high-power electric furnaces

of gravity), specifications of the lifting
crane to be used (maximum lifted load,
dimensions);
 Train staff in the handling of lifting
equipment
and
driving
mechanical
transport devices; etc
 ̇The area of operation of fixed handling
equipment (e.g. cranes, elevated platforms)
should not cross above worker and pre-
assembly areas;
 Material and product handling should
remain within restricted zones under
supervision;
 Regular maintenance and repair of
lifting, electrical, and transport equipment
should be conducted
 Shield surfaces where close contact with
hot equipment or splashing from hot
materials is expected
 Implement
safety
buffer
zones to
separate areas where hot materials and
items are handled or temporarily stored
 Wherever possible, sources of noise
should be isolated
 Hearing
protectors
(earmuffs
or
earplugs) should be provided in high noise
areas
 Reducing exposure time may also prove
effective
Chemical
Workers may be exposed to iron
oxide and silica dust that can be
contaminated with heavy metals such
as chromium (Cr), nickel (Ni), lead
(Pb)
Workers may be exposed to gas
inhalation
hazards,
which
may
contain
heavy
metals.
Further
inhalation hazards include sulfur
oxides
and
Volatile
Organic
Compounds (VOC) and polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH).

 Sources of dust and gases should be
separated and enclosed;
 Design natural ventilation system in hot
shops to maximize air circulation.
 Exhaust ventilation should be installed
at the significant point sources of dust and
gas emissions, particularly the Induction
Furnace (IF), Electric Arc Furnace (EAF),
continuous casting etc.
 Provide a sealed cabin with filtered air
conditioning if an operator is needed in a
contaminated area;
 Use of filter respirators when exposed to
heavy dust;
 For light, metallic dust and gases, fresh-

--- Page 181 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

179
air supplied respirators should be used.
 Alternatively, a complete facial gas
mask (or an ―overpressure‖ helmet) may be
used, equipped with electrical ventilation
 For carbon monoxide (CO) exposure,
detection equipment should be installed to
alert control rooms and local personnel. In
case of emergency intervention in areas
with high levels of CO, workers should be
provided with portable CO detectors, and
fresh-air supplied respirators

2.3.
Community Health & Safety Issues
The common health and safety impacts on the community during the construction, operation, and
decommissioning of steel re-rolling facilities are:
 Noise, vibration, dust creation, traffic movement, road safety, emissions and air quality, fire,
explosion & toxic hazards due to accidental release of molten steel and chemicals, waste
water discharge and water quality, disposal of solid waste
 Strain on transport networks and local infrastructure - disruption to road users both
pedestrian and other vehicles

2.4.
Social Issues
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘

3. Performance Indicators and Monitoring
3.1.
Wastewater discharge quality standards
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
pH
6 – 9
6 - 9
BOD
mg/L
50 - 100
COD
mg/L
250
200 - 400
TSS
mg/L
35
150 - 200
Oil and Grease
mg/L
10
10
Cadmium
mg/L
0.01
0.05 – 0.5
Chromium (total)
mg/L
0.5
0.5 - 1
Chromium (hexavalent)
mg/L
0.1
0.1 - 1
Copper
mg/L
0.5
0.5 - 3
Lead
mg/L
0.2
NA
TIn
mg/L
NA
Mercury
mg/L
0.01
NA
Nickel
mg/L
0.5
Zinc
mg/L
Cyanides (Free)
mg/L
0.1
NA

--- Page 182 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

180
Cyanides (Total)
mg/L
0.5
NA
Total Nitrogen
mg/L
30
NA
Total Phosphorus
mg/L
NA
Phenol
mg/L
0.5
Flouride
mg/L (as F)
NA
Sulfide
mg/L
0.1
1 - 2
Ammonia
mg/L (as N)
Iron
mg/L
NA
PAH
mg/L
0.05
NA
Toxicity
To be determined on a case basis
* The National Standards are not specific to steel re-rolling sector and is applicable for all the industrial units. The
national standards are defined as per the location of disposal – inland surface water; public sewer; irrigated land. For
ease of comparison, here the national standards are given as range and not as per the location of disposal.

3.2.
Point Emission Sources
Pollutants
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National Standards*
Particulate Matter
mg/Nm3
20-50 (a)
NA
Oil Mist
mg/Nm3
15
NA
NOx
mg/Nm3
500
NA
SO2
mg/Nm3
500
NA
VOC
mg/Nm3
20
NA
PCDD/F
ng TEQ/ Nm3
0.1
NA
Carbon Monoxide (CO)
mg/Nm3
100 (EAF)
NA
Chromium (Cr)
mg/Nm3
NA
Cadmium (Cd)
mg/Nm3
0.2
NA
Lead (Pb)
mg/Nm3
10
Nickel (Ni)
mg/Nm3
NA
Hydrogen Chloride (HCl)
mg/Nm3
10
350
Fluoride
mg/Nm3
NA
Hydrogen Fluoride (HF)
mg/Nm3
10
NA
H2S
mg/Nm3
NA
Ammonia
mg/Nm3
30
NA
Benzo(a)pirene
mg/Nm3
0.1
NA
Tar fume (b)
mg/Nm3
NA
* The National Standards are not specific to steel re-rolling sector and is applicable for all the industrial units. The
national standards are defined as per the categories of areal – industrial and mixed; commercial and mixed;
residential and rural; sensitive. For ease of comparison, here the national standards are given as range and not as per
the location of disposal.

3.3.
Resource and energy consumption standards
Inputs per
unit of
Product
Unit
Guideline Values
GIIP
National
Standards
BF
BOF
EAF
Rolling
Electricity,
MJ/t
270-370
40-120
1250-1800
70-140
No national

--- Page 183 ---
Guidelines on Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for
Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

181
direct
product
kWh/t
standards
Fuel
MJ/t
product
1050-2700
20-55
1100-2200
Water
m3/t
product
1-50
0.5-5
1-15
3.4.
Social standards
This section will be same as described in the corresponding section of ‗Guidance Note on
Environmental & Social Risk Management (ESRM) for Textile and Apparel Sector‘.

4. General Description of Industry Activities
Sector Activity
Sub-sector Activities
Steel
Melting
Works (SMW)
In
the
first
part,
SMW
uses
scraps
to
produce
MS
Billets/slabs/blooms/ingots/slabs. Scrap is directly charged into Induction
Furnace (IF) or Electrical Arc Furnace (EAF) for melting. Sponge iron may
also be added along with scrap as it does not contain any impurities, melts
quicker and it is easier to control the chemistry of melt. Sizing of scrap before
charging into furnace is important to maximize bucket density, better capacity
utilization and minimizing energy losses. Flux (lime or dolo lime) can also be
added along with the scrap for refining which result in slag formation.
Steel Re-Rolling
Mills (SRRM)
Semi-finished products are first heated in a re-heat furnace until they are red
hot (around 1200o C). On all types of mill the semi-finished products go first
to a roughing stand. A stand is a collection of steel rolls (or drums) on which
pressure can be applied to squeeze the hot steel passing through them, and
arranged so as to form the steel into the required shape. The roughing stand is
the first part of the rolling mill. The large semi-finished product is often
passed backwards and forwards through it several times. Each pass gradually
changes the shape and dimension of the steel closer to that of the required
finished product.