--- Page 1 ---
সাসটেইনেবল ফাইন্যান্স ডিপার্টমেন্ট Website: www.bb.org.bd

বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক
প্রধান কার্যালয়
ঢাকা।
ডিসেম্বর ৩১, ২০২০
এসএফডি সার্কুলার নং: ০৬ তারিখঃ. ------িটটিটি
পৌষ ১৬, ১৪২৭

ব্যবস্থাপনা পরিচালক/প্রধান নির্বাহী কর্মকর্তা
বাংলাদেশে কার্যরত সকল তফসিলি ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠান

Sustainability Rating of Banks and Financial Institutions প্রসঙ্গে |

সাসটেইনেবল ফাইন্যান্স ডিপার্টমেন্ট কর্তৃক জারিকৃত এসএফডি সার্কুলার নং- ০৫/২০২০ এর প্রতি
আপনাদের দৃষ্টি আকর্ষণ করা যাচ্ছে। উক্ত সার্কুলারের মাধ্যমে ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহের জন্য প্রণীত
“Sustainable Finance Policy” (রিপোর্টিং ফরম্যাটসহ) জারি করা AE |

২। Sustainable Finance Policy -তে বর্ণিত নির্দেশনা বাস্তবায়নে ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহের
Performance যাচাইক্রমে Sustainability Rating fate হবে। উক্ত নীতিমালার নির্দেশনা এবং
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)-3, ২, ৫, ৬, ৭, ৮১ ৯, ১০, ১২, ১৩, ১৭ বিবেচনায় নিয়ে
Sustainability Rating নির্ণয়কল্লে component হিসেবে Sustainable Finance Indicators, CSR
Activities, Green Refinance ও Core Banking Sustainability-ce নির্ধারণ করা হয়েছে।

৩। পূর্ববর্তী বছরের ডিসেম্বর ভিত্তিক তথ্যের আলোকে ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠাসমূহের Sustainability
Rating পরবর্তী বছরে নির্ণীত হবে। উক্ত রেটিং এর ভিত্তিতে নির্ণীত শীর্ষ ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠাসমূহের তালিকা
প্রতি বছর বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংকের ওয়েবসাইটে প্রকাশ করা হবে | উল্লেখ্য, ডিসেম্বর ২০২০ ভিত্তিক Sustainability
Rating ২০২১ সালে নির্ণীত হবে এবং এ সংক্রান্ত তালিকা প্রকাশিত হবে |

৪। এ সার্কুলারের সাথে সংযোজনী (Sustainability Rating components) সার্কুলারের অবিচ্ছেদ্য
অংশ মর্মে গণ্য হবে।

৫। ব্যাংক কোম্পানি আইন, ১৯৯১ এর ৪৫ ধারা এবং আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠান আইন, ১৯৯৩ এর ১৮ছে) ধারায়
প্রদত্ত ক্ষমতাবলে এ নির্দেশনা জারি করা হ'ল, যা অবিলম্বে কার্যকর হবে |

আপনাদের বিশ্বস্ত,

সংযোজনী : বর্ণনা মোতাবেক | i

(খন্দকার মোরশেদ মিল্লাত)
মহাব্যবস্থাপক
ফোন ৪ ৯৫৩০৩২০
E-mail: morshed.millat @bb.org.bd
gm.sfd@bb.org.bd

--- Page 2 ---
Sustainability Rating of Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 1 of 4

1. Components of Sustainability Rating

1.1. Sustainable Finance Indicators

It is a structured mechanism for financing a product/a project/an initiative a sustainable one,
not only belong to green or climate finance based on (i) Climate Change Mitigation (ii)
Climate Change Adaptation (iii) Other Environmental sustainable Implementations and
Impact on Inclusive Sustainable Green Growth but also other products belong to
Agriculture, CMSME or Socially Responsible Financing Category with respect to
sustainability. Banks’/FIs’ green governance, Environment and Social Risk Management
(ESRM) and intra-institutional green banking practices are very important sustainability
issues. Sustainable Finance Indicators include Banks’/FIs’ sustainable finance performance
including green finance, priority sustainable Agriculture and CMSME finance, access to
sustainable finance for women, in-house green banking performances, ESRM compliance,
participation in green investment etc. Timely required intervention by the Board of Directors
(in case of SOCBs, PCBs or SDBs) or Competent Authority (in case of FCBs) in any
sustainable finance (including Risk Management or ToR of SFU) issues, capacity building
initiatives, sustainable finance disclosures etc will also be evaluated in the rating.

A. Quantitative Components

Sl.
Components
Sustainable Finance
1. Green Finance (GF) as % of Total Term Loan Disbursed
2. Sustainable Finance (SF) as % of Total Loan Disbursed
3. Number of Borrowers with SF as % of Total Borrowers
4. Number of Borrowers with GF as % of Total SF Borrowers
5. SF in rural areas as % of Total SF
6. Number of Women Borrowers with SF as % of Total Borrowers with SF
7. Sustainable Agriculture as % of Total Loan Disbursed with SF
8. Sustainable CMSMEs as % of Total Loan Disbursed with SF
9. SRF as % of Total Loan Disbursed with SF
10. Number of Categories belong to GF
11. Number of Products/Projects/Initiatives belong to GF
12. ESDD Rated project finance as % Total Finance
13. NPLs in SF as % of Total NPLs
14. NPLs in SF as % of Total Outstanding
15. Number of Beneficiaries of concessional loans under CRF
In-house Green Banking practices
16. Electricity Consumption per employee
17. Water Consumption per employee
18. Paper Usage per employee
19. Transport expenses for official purpose per employee
20. Solar powered branches as % of total branches

--- Page 3 ---
Sustainability Rating of Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 2 of 4

Sl.
Components
21. Branches with rainwater harvesting as % of total branches
22. Branches with solid waste management system as % of total branches
23. Solar powered ATM booth as % of Total ATM booth
24. MFS accounts as % of Industry’s MFS accounts
25. Online branches as % of Total branches
26. App-based Banking Accounts as % of Total Accounts
27. Internet Banking Accounts as % of Total Accounts
Green Investment
28. Green Investment as % of Total Investments
29. Green Equity as % of Shareholders’ Equity

B. Qualitative Components

Sl
Factors
1. Any decision taken by the BoD/(Regional Office/SMT in case of FCBs)
in SF? Yes/No
2. Any decision taken by the BoD/(Regional Office/SMT in case of FCBs)
in GF? Yes/No
3. Any decision taken by the BoD/(Regional Office/SMT in case of foreign
banks) in Green Banking activities other than GF? Yes/No
4. Any decision taken by the Risk Management Committee of
BoD/(Regional Office/SMT in case of foreign banks) in SF? Yes/No


5. MIS for ESRM? Yes/No

6. MIS for SF? Yes/No
7. MIS for CRF? Yes/No
8. Review the SF policies/strategies as per ICC guidelines of BB? Yes/No
9. Steps taken for capacity building of employee? Yes/No
10. Steps taken for awareness building of customers? Yes/No
11. Does the institution’s website contain a specific section separated for
Sustainable Finance/Banking related issue? Yes/No
12. Does the institution’s annual report contain a specific section separated
for Sustainable Finance/Banking related issue? Yes/No
13. Reporting to SFD/Compliance with time to time SFD instructions in due
time? Yes/No


1.2. CSR Activities

CSR activities linked to sustainability help banks/FIs to be socially accountable. Merely
philanthropy of CSR activities will have no scope for evaluation. Bangladesh Bank has
policy intervention and monitoring initiatives with a view to mainstreaming of CSR
activities in the financial sector into a broad range of direct and indirect CSR engagements
including humanitarian relief and disaster response; widening of advancement opportunities
for disadvantaged population segments with support in areas of Healthcare, Education and

--- Page 4 ---
Sustainability Rating of Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 3 of 4

Climate Risk Fund (CRF) putting importance on environment and climate change mitigation
and adaptation etc. The CSR expenditure in the area of Health, Education and CRF of
banks/FIs in accordance with the policy and guidelines provided by Bangladesh Bank will
be evaluated in sustainability rating. The rating also includes evaluating CSR governance,
gender equity and in-house CSR performance of banks/FIs.

A. Quantitative

Sl. Components
Education
Health
Utilization of CRF Grant


B. Qualitative

Sl. Components
Policy
Due Diligence check list for CSR project, Yes/No
Any undue intervention by the BoD for CSR approval? Yes/No
Penalty imposed for non-compliance of CSR issues? Yes/No
Minimum (20%) women employees in the work place? Yes/No
Separate transportation facilities for women employees? Yes/No
Harassment policy in the work place, reviewed or not? Yes/No
Participation in Daycare Center; Own/Combined? Yes/No
Minimum (25%) of CSR Expenditure in rural areas? Yes/No
Disclosure
CSR Activities Disclosed in Annual Report? Yes/No
10. CSR Activities Disclosed in Print/Electronic Media? Yes/No
In House CSR Activities
11. Scholarship for employee’s children? Yes/No
12. Medical facilities for employee’s dependents? Yes/No
13. Safety measures in the work place? Yes/No


1.3. Green Refinance

Bangladesh Bank has proactively come forward to complement refinance facility (in BDT)
with a view to broadening financing avenues for green products/projects/initiatives such as
solar energy, bio-gas plant, effluent treatment plant, recycling, energy efficiency etc. In this
rating, the performance of PFIs will depend upon availing refinance facility for a number of
green products/projects/initiatives belong to different categories/sectors. Similarly the
performance of PFIs will also depend upon availing refinance facility on utilizing USD
component and Euro component under Green Transformation Fund (GTF) will have a
positive impact over this rating.

--- Page 5 ---
Sustainability Rating of Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 4 of 4

Sl
Factors
BB Refinance
1. Annual percentage of refinance taken of the total disbursement
2. Sector wise Refinance
3. Product wise Refinance
GTF
4. USD Component
5. Euro Component


1.4. Core Banking Sustainability

The term ‘Sustainability’ is well integrated into core banking practices. The concept of
sustainable banking has gradually been created by banking practices that are environment-
friendly. This assists the financial sector to play a role in supporting development goals and
to facilitate the transition to a green and low carbon economy. Evaluating performance of
banks and FIs in sustainable finance or any other aspect requires analyzing their core
banking activities. Generally, the core banking includes deposit, loan/investments and credit
processing. Among the integral core banking services are floating new accounts, servicing
loans, calculating interests, processing deposits and withdrawals, and customer relationship
management activities. But in this case, the methodology includes performance regarding
maintenance of asset quality, capital adequacy, proper liquidity, regulatory compliance,
practice of governance etc. Sustainability of core banking practices is equally important as
practice of sustainable financing.

Sl
Factors
A. Quantitative
1. Total NPL rate
2. Capital Ratio against Risk Weighted Assets (CRAR)
3. Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR)
4. Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR)
5. Core Risk Assessment
6. Return on Asset (ROA)
7. Return on Equity (ROE)
8. Net Interest Margin (NIM)
9. Efficiency Ratio
B. Qualitative
10. Failure in maintaining adequate provision against loans and advances? Yes/No
11. Failure in maintaining adequate CRR? Yes/No
12. Maintaining ADR/IDR Requirement? Yes/No
13. Exceeding of Single Borrower Exposure Limit? Yes/No
14. Penalty imposed for non-compliance with CRR & SLR? Yes/No
15. Penalty for regulatory non-compliance (other than CRR & SLR)? Yes/No
16. Exceeding Foreign Exchange open position? Yes/No
17. Undue intervention by BoD for loan approval? Yes/No