--- Page 1 ---
website: www.bb.org.bd

Sustainable Finance Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office, Dhaka


July 08, 2020
SFD Circular No. 03




Date:------------------
Ashar 24, 1427

Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Refinancing/on lending scheme of USD 200 million and
Euro 200 million under Green Transformation Fund(GTF)

Please refer to FE Circular No. 02 dated January 14, 2016, its subsequent circular/circular letters
and FE Circular No. 20 dated April 15, 2020 issued by Bangladesh Bank(BB).
02. BB operates Green Transformation Fund(GTF) in US dollar for extending loans to
Authorized Dealers(ADs) for on lending/refinancing to all manufacturer-exporters. As per above
mentioned FE Circular No. 20/2020, Euro 200 million has been introduced to GTF with some
additional facilities.
In view of the above context, existing and new PFIs intended to avail USD component as well as
Euro component are advised to sign Participation Agreement(PA) with Sustainable Finance
Department(SFD), BB as per PA format attached here-with.
In case of PFIs, who earlier signed PA with BB and now intend to avail only USD component,
are not required to sign PA as per new format mentioned above.
Enclo: Participation Agreement
Yours faithfully,


(Khondkar Morshed Millat)
General Manager
Phone: 9530320
mail: morshed.millat@bb.org.bd
gm.sfd@bb.org.bd

--- Page 2 ---
PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT

Between

BANGLADESH BANK

and

As participant in the

Green Transformation Fund (GTF)

Page 1 of 17

--- Page 3 ---
PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT
PARTIES

This Participating Agreement (hereafter also referred to ‘Participating Agreement’ or

“Agreement’) is signed on the ee OUR Oar ce deg

between

Bangladesh Bank (hereafter called BB), established by the Bangladesh Bank order
1972 (P.O no. 127 of 1972) having its Head Office at Motijheel C/A, Dhaka
(hereafter called BB) represented by the Sustainable Finance Department (hereafter
called SFD).

And

[72272] Duly established under Companies Act of 1994, carrying on its
business under Bank Company Act 1991 (Amended in 2013), having license from BB

License 10: dated] permitted by to deal with foreign exchange, having its
1০89০০০77০০ ঢুররার়রাাকাজাতারাততা (hereafter also referred to
“Authorized Dealer’ ‘AD’) as participant in the Green Transformation Fund
(hereafter also referred to GTF).

PREAMBLE

Whereas,(A.1) BB established a revolving fund of USD 200 million to offer on-
lending/refinancing for facilitating access to financing in foreign exchange for all
manufacturer-exporters irrespective of sectors against import of capital machineries
and accessories relevant to environment-friendly/green attributes specified by BB.
and

(A.2) BB introduced a revolving fund of Euro 200 million for extending loan to ADs
against their financing to all manufacturing enterprises for importing of environment
friendly & energy efficient (including solar energy and renewable energy under power
sector)/green capital machineries and accessories and also facilitating access to
financing to import industrial raw materials used in all manufacturing enterprises
including both export oriented industries and deem exporters.

Modalities of offering on-lending/refinancing facilities to ADs for lending in above
mentioned sectors on terms and conditions set forth in the FE circular no. 02, dated
January 14, 2016 and FE circular no. 20, dated April 15, 2020 issued by BB.

(B) It is required to enter into a participation agreement between BB and the ADs
interested to avail of the on-lending/refinancing facilities under GTF (US Dollar &
Euro). and

Page 2 of 17

--- Page 4 ---
(C) The ADs willing to avail of the on-lending/refinancing facilities from the above
mentioned fund on terms and conditions set forth in FE circular no. 02, dated January
14, 2016 and FE circular no. 20, dated April 15, 2020 issued by BB; agree to comply
with the terms and conditions of this agreement.

Now, therefore, the parties hereby agree the follows:-

ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 1.1 Definitions and Related Terms

Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined in this Section 1.1 will, for
all purposes of this Agreement and of any agreement supplemental thereto, have the
meanings herein specified, as follows:

a) ‘Bangladesh Bank’ means the bank established by the Bangladesh Bank Order,
1972 (President's Order No. 127 of 1972) for the purpose of carrying out the business
of central banking, as represented by its Governor. Bangladesh Bank shall act as the
implementing agency of the project.

b) ‘Scheduled Bank’ means a bank as used in Article 37 of Bangladesh Bank
Order, 1972 (P.O No. 127 of 1972).

c) Authorized Dealers (hereafter also referred to 'ADs') means any scheduled bank
duly registered according to the applicable laws and regulations of the Recipient,
which is authorized by BB to deal in foreign exchange under FER Act, 1947.

d) 10909৬০110৭ means the Governor of Bangladesh Bank.

e) ‘Financing’ means the funding that will be provided under the Green
Transformation Fund (GTF) both in US Dollar & Euro facility.

f) ‘Firm’ means a private enterprise or an enterprise in which private shareholders
have majority ownership, and to which an AD proposes to make or has made a
Financing.

£) 'SFD' means Sustainable Finance Department

h) 'FEPD' means Foreign Exchange Policy Department

1) 'FRTMD' means Forex Reserve & Treasury Management Department

j) 'Beneficiary' means any person/institution to whom the Authorized Dealer (AD)
has provided or will provide loan under this Fund.

k) "নও means Participating Financial Institutions that will participate in GTF

1) ‘Sub-Project’ means a specific Project to be carried out by a Private Firm
utilizing the proceeds of GTF.

m) ‘Taka’ (hereafter also referred to “TK’) means the currency of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh.

Page 3 of 17

--- Page 5 ---
n) ‘Dollar’ (hereafter also referred to ‘USD’) means the currency of The United
States of America’

0) Euro(hereafter also referred to ‘Euro’) means the currency of The European
Union’

p) ‘Circular’ means FE circular no. 02, dated January 14, 2016 and FE circular no.
20, dated April 15, 2020 or any amendment thereof

q) ‘Fund’ means Green Transformation Fund

SECTION 1.2 Articles, Sections, Number, Ete.

Unless otherwise specified, references to Articles, Sections and other of this
subdivisions of this Agreement are to the designated Articles, Sections, and other
subdivisions of this Agreement as amended. The words replace - ‘hereof,’ ‘herein,’
‘hereunder,’ ‘hereafter’ and words of similar import refer to this Agreement as a
whole. The headings or title of the several articles and sections, and the table of
contents appended to copies hereof, will be solely for convenience of reference and
will not affect the meaning, construction or effect of the provisions hereof. The
singular form of any word used herein, including the terms defined in Section 1.1 of
this Agreement, will include the plural, and vice versa.

ARTICLE II
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
SECTION 2.1 Representations and Warranties of the Financial Institution

The AD makes the following representations as the basis for its participation in the
Project:

(a) The AD is a registered company under the Companies Act of 1913/1994 and
licensed to operate as Bank in Bangladesh under the Bank Company Act 1991 having
authorized dealership licenses under Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.
Pursuant to the Companies Act of 1913/1994 and by its Articles of Association, the
PFI has the power to enter into transactions contemplated by this Agreement and to
carry out its obligations hereunder. By proper action, the AD has been duly authorized
to execute, deliver and duly perform the duties and fulfill the obligations of this
Agreement.

(b) The AD is in full compliance with the eligibility criteria for participation in the
fund, as set forth in Article III.

(c) The AD has not experienced any materially adverse financial or business situation,
not already disclosed to the BB or stakeholders, which may affect its eligibility as a
participant in the Fund.

Page 4 of 17

--- Page 6 ---
(d) The AD is not in default under any of provisions of the laws of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh, which defaults, would affect its existence or its powers
referred to in Section 2.1(8).

(e) The AD is not in default under any provisions of any of its funding agreement with
other financial institutions.
ARTICLE III

GREEN TRANSFORMATION FUND (GTF)
SECTION 3.1. Green Transformation Fund

(a) Green Transformation Fund in US Dollar is intended to facilitate access to
financing for all manufacturer-exporters irrespective of sectors against import of
capital machineries and accessories relevant to following environment-friendly/green
attributes:

a) Water use efficiency in wet processing;

b) Water conservation and management;

c) Waste management;

d) Resource efficiency and recycling;

e) Renewable energy;

f) Energy efficiency;

g) Heat and temperature management;

h) Air ventilation and circulation efficiency;

i) Work environment improvement initiatives; and

1) Other sectors to be specified by Bangladesh Bank from time to time.

(b) In case of EURO component of GTF Para A.2 of preamble will be applicable.

(c) Pursuant to the terms and conditions in the Circular, the ADs will provide best
efforts in selecting and implementing the specific sub-project.

(d) All Sub-projects must meet the eligibility criteria pursuant to the Circular.

(e) The requisition for funds by the AD and the disbursement of funds by the FRTMD
will be in accordance with the circular.

SECTION 3.2 Pricing

The interest rate will be determined on the basis of pricing methods specified in the
Circulars (FE circular no. 02, dated January 14, 2016 and FE circular no. 20, dated
April 15, 2020).

Page 5 of 17

--- Page 7 ---
SECTION 3.3. Credit Repayments: Principal Amortization

(a) Principal and interest payments in foreign currency along with the principal
amortization schedule, on the Fund will be determined by the Bangladesh Bank.

ARTICLE IV

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR CONTINUED PARTICIPATION BY ADs

SECTION 4.1 Eligibility Criteria for ADs

The ADs will be required to meet the eligibility criteria for participating in the facility
and maintain the required standard level of operation for continuation of participation
during the tenure. In order to become eligible to participate in the fund, the financial
institutions must meet and maintain the following criteria:

(a) The ADs must hold a valid license from Bangladesh Bank to operate as banks
which are authorized by BB to deal in foreign exchange and must have a
demonstrated track record of providing long term lending;

(b)The ADs must have qualified and experienced management, adequate organization
and institutional capacity for its specific risk profile;

(c) The ADs must have appropriate capacity, including staffing, for carrying out
appraisal (including environmental assessment) of loans to borrowers and for
supervising implementation thereof;

(d) The ADs must have well defined credit/loan policies and procedures for
management of financial risks (liquidity, credit, foreign exchange, interest rate and
market risk including risks associated with balance sheet and income statement);

(e) The ADs must have adequate and functional internal audits and controls;

(f) The ADs will be required to meet the eligibility criteria described in the Circular
for continued participation in the Fund, as modified from time to time.

SECTION 4.2 Compliance and Continuing Eligibility
(a) After being contracted as AD, to participate in the Facility, the AD must continue

to satisfy the eligibility criteria referred to above in Sec 4.1 of this Agreement,

Page 6 of 17

--- Page 8 ---
(9) If the AD is not in compliance with any of the eligibility criteria, the SFD will
promptly notify to the AD that identifies the specific eligibility criteria with which the
AD is not in compliance and seek appropriate response from the AD to remedy the
non-compliance within an agreed upon time period.

(c) If the AD fails to maintain its eligibility status under the Facility, the SFD, will
have the right to suspend all disbursements under the Fund in respect of the AD from
the date of such failure.

(d) The SFD may re-establish the eligibility status of the AD upon demonstrated
compliance by the AD that the specific eligibility deviations have been removed,
mitigated or no longer exists.

SECTION 4.3 Eligibility Criteria for Sub-Project

4.3.1 Eligible activities:

(a) Re-financing will be provided only against loans disbursed after the issuance of
FE Circular No, 2 dated January 14, 2016 and FE circular no. 20, dated April 15,
2020.

Green Transformation Fund in US Dollar is intended to facilitate access to
financing for all manufacturer-exporters irrespective of sectors against import of
capital machineries and accessories relevant to following environment-friendly/green
attributes:

a) Water use efficiency in wet processing;

b) Water conservation and management;

c) Waste management;

d) Resource efficiency and recycling;

e) Renewable energy;

f) Energy efficiency;

g) Heat and temperature management;

h) Air ventilation and circulation efficiency;

i) Work environment improvement initiatives; and

j) Other sectors to be specified by Bangladesh Bank from time to time.

(b) In case of EURO component of GTF Para A.2 of preamble will be applicable.
4.3.2. Eligible borrowers:
The financing in US Dollar will be available for all manufacturer-exporters to import

green/environment friendly capital machineries and accessories in the country and
provision of Para A.2 of preamble will be applicable.

Page 7 of 17

--- Page 9 ---
The financing Any firm eligible to borrow in local currency from banking system as
per foreign exchange regulations will be eligible to avail this facility, subject to the
following conditions:

a) The firm has demonstrated compliance with all relevant Environmental
Acts and Regulations of Bangladesh and Environmental and Social Risk
Management Guidelines (amendments thereof) of BB.

b) The Firm has demonstrated compliance with the eligibility criteria pursuant
to the Circular.

ARTICLE V
COVENANTS OF THE PARTICAPATING FINANCIAL INSTITUTION
SECTION 5.1 Regular Re-payments and Unconditional Obligation

The PFI will make regular re-payment of amounts due on any outstanding facility.
The obligation of the PFI to make payments required hereof and to perform and
observe the other agreements on its part contained herein will be absolute and
unconditional, irrespective of any defense or any rights to set-off, recoupment or
counterclaim it might otherwise have against Bangladesh Bank, and during the term
of this Agreement, the PFI will pay absolutely the gross payments to be made on
account of the Fund as and all other payments required hereunder, free of any
deductions and without abatement, diminution or set-off.

The PFI hereby agrees and authorize Bangladesh Bank that the due installments will
be recovered from the PFIs’ Foreign Currency Account maintained with Bangladesh
Bank as per the amortization schedule. If adequate fund is not available in the PFIs’
F/C Account to recover the due installment, the equivalent BDT (at BB Selling Rate
on that date) will be debited from the respective PFIs’ current account maintained
with BB. In case of unavailability of funds in both accounts, BB will charge a penal
interest on such dues at a rate 2% above the repo rate and will become payable on
demand. BB will also have the right to set off such overdue installment from any of
the PFIs’ assets held in BB in its security depository or in others. The PFIs will
require submitting a debit authority or security encashment authority to BB for
realizing the due installments at the time of first application.

SECTION 5.2 Records, Financial Statements and Budgets

(a) The PFI will: (i) verify and document the status of the Sub-project supported
under the Fund by on-site inspection at least half yearly; (ii) prepare Sub-project

Page 8 of 17

--- Page 10 ---
progress reports covering operations under the credit to be submitted to the SFD
within 30 days of each quarter and (iv) undertake quarterly, half yearly and annual
assessments of the demand for financing from the Fund to be presented to the
FRTMD.

(b) In addition, the PFI will, within 120 days (or such other period as determined by
SFD) after the close of each fiscal year, submits its annual audited financial
statements to the SFD. The SFD and/or the representatives will be permitted at all
reasonable times during the term of this Agreement to examine the books and records
of the PFI with respect to the Sub-project.

SECTION 5.3 Documents and Supporting Schedules

(a) The PFI will be required to maintain complete documentation and supporting
schedules for each sub-project accepted for financing under the Project. The
FEPD/FRTMD/SED or any other relevant Department/Cell may periodically request
from the PFI, and the PFI will promptly provide, material documents, schedules and
other information on a specific Firm or Sub-Project, as required by Bangladesh Bank.

(b) The PFI will maintain credit files for each Firm and Sub-Project in accordance
with the Circular and Banking best practice.

SECTION 5.4 Right of Access to the Sub-project

The PFI agrees that during the term of this Agreement the SFD and /or other
authorised representatives from SFD will have the right at all reasonable times during
normal business hours to enter upon the site of the Sub-project to examine and inspect
the Sub-project; provided, however, that this right is subject to the laws and the
regulations of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.

ARTICLE VI
GENERAL AND SPECIAL CONDITIONS
SECTION 6.1 General Conditions for PFIs

Bangladesh Bank shall have the right to

(a) suspend or terminate the right of the PFI to use the proceeds of the Financing
made available to it to make Sub-loans or declare it due and payable upon the
PFI’s failure to perform any of its obligations under the Participation
Agreement; and

Page 9 of 17

--- Page 11 ---
SECTION 6.2

require the PFI:

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)


(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)


to maintain qualified management staff in adequate numbers as
required for the purposes of the Fund;

to provide, promptly as needed, the funds, facilities, services and other
resources required for such purposes;

to make one or more Sub-loans to one or more Eligible Sub-borrower
under Sub-loan Agreements on the terms and conditions that might
include conditions set forth in Section 7.3 to this Agreement;

to exercise its rights in relation to each such Sub-loan in such manner
as to protect its interests and the interests of BB and, comply with its
obligations under its respective Participation Agreement, and achieve
the purposes of the Fund;

to not assign, amend, abrogate or waive any of its agreements
providing for a Sub-loan, or any provision thereof, without the prior
consent of the BB; and

to supervise, monitor and report on the activities to be carried out
under a Sub-project by each Eligible Sub-borrower in accordance with
the provisions of the Circular.

to exchange views with and furnish all such information to BB, as may
be reasonably requested by BB, with regard to the progress of the
activities under the Project, the performance of its obligations under its
respective Participation Agreement, and other matters relating to the
purposes of the Fund;

to prepare and submit to the BB: (A) reports on Sub-loan
disbursements in line with the requirements of the interim unaudited
financial report format included in the Circular as and when
reimbursement claims are made; and (B) annual financial performance
reports until the Participation Agreement has ended; and

to inform promptly the BB of any condition which interferes or
threatens to interfere with the progress of its activities under its
respective Participation Agreement.

to obtain rights to examine and inspect the Sub-project; by its officials
and or other authorized representatives at all reasonable times during
normal business hours to enter upon the site of the Sub-project
provided, however, that this right is subject to the laws and the
regulations of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.

Special Terms and Conditions

The PFI shall ensure that their Financing Agreement with the sub-borrower (sub-
project) given them adequate rights to protect its interest and those of the BB,
including the right to:

Page 10 of 17

--- Page 12 ---
(a) suspend or terminate the right of the Sub-borrower to use the proceeds of the
Sub-loans or declare it due and payable upon the Sub-borrower’s failure to
perform any of its obligations under the Sub-loan Agreement; and

(b) require the Eligible Sub-borrower to:

(i) carry out the Sub-project financed out of the proceeds of a Sub-loan
with due diligence and efficiency and in accordance with sound
technical, economical, financial, managerial, environmental and social
standards and practices, including those set forth in the Circular and
other relevant Guidelines;

(ii) (a) maintain policies and procedures to enable it to monitor and
evaluate the progress of the Sub-loan in accordance with indicators
acceptable to BB; and (b) prepare financial statements in accordance
with consistently applied accounting standards in accordance with the
Circular;

(c) require that:

(i) (a) the goods, works and services to be financed out of the proceeds of
the Sub-loan shall be procured in accordance with the provisions of the
Circular and (b) such goods, works and services shall be exclusively
used in the carrying out of the activities financed out of the proceeds of
the relevant Sub-Loan;

(ii) to inspect, by itself or jointly with representatives of the BB, if the BB
shall so request, such goods and the sites, works, plants and
construction included in the activities to be financed out of the
proceeds of a Sub-loan, the operation thereof, and any relevant records
and documents; and

(iii) | Obtain all such information as the BB shall reasonably request relating
to the foregoing and to the administration, operations and financial
condition of the Eligible Sub-borrower and to the benefits to be
derived from the activities financed out of the proceeds of a Sub-loan.

ARTICLE VII
DEFAULT EVENTS AND REMEDIES

SECTION 7.1 Events of Default

Any one of the following, which occurs and continues, will constitute an Event of
Defauit:

(a) Failure by the PFI to pay any amounts required to be paid hereof which failure
causes an Event of Default to the agreements relating to the received Fund Loan;

Page 11 of 17

--- Page 13 ---
(০) Failure of the PFI to observe and perform any covenant, condition or agreement
on its part required to be observed or performed by this Agreement, other than making
the payments referred to in (a) above, which continues for a period of 30 days after
written notice, which notice will specify such failure and request that it be remedied,
given to the PFI by the FRTMD/SFD, unless the FRTMD/SFD, will agree in writing
to an extension of such time; provided, however, that if the failure stated in the notice
cannot be corrected within such period, the FRTMD/SFD will not unreasonably
withhold their consent to an extension of such time if corrective action is instituted
within such period and diligently pursued until the default is corrected;

(c) The filing of bankruptcy by the PFI; and

(d) Non-compliance with applicable laws and regulations governing the operation of
the PFI.

(e) In the event of default by the borrower/final beneficiary/owner of sub-project
under this fund, BB reserves the full authority to cancel the financing facility.

SECTION 7.2 Remedies on Default

Upon the occurrence and continuation of an Event of Default, the FRTMD will
proceed to protect and enforce the rights of the BB, FRTMD, in the manner it deems
most expedient to the interest of the Fund and Bangladesh Bank.

SECTION 7.3 Remedies Not Exclusive

No remedies herein conferred upon or reserved to the Fund is intended to be exclusive
of any other available remedy or remedies.

SECTION 7.4 Expenses on Default

In the event the PFI should default under this Agreement and the Bangladesh Bank,
should employ legal counsel or incur other expenses for the collection of the payment
due under this Agreement or the enforcement of performance or observance of any
obligation or agreement on the part of the PFI, the PFI agrees to pay the Bangladesh
Bank the reasonable fees of such legal counsel and such other expenses so incurred by
Bangladesh Bank.

SECTION 7.5 Notices of Default

The FRTMD will issue to the PFI the Notice of Default by registered mail or in
person duly acknowledged by the PFI.

Page 12 of 17

--- Page 14 ---
ARTICLE VHI

INDEMNIFICATION

SECTION 8.1 Non-liabilities of Green Transformation Fund

Bangladesh Bank will not be obligated to pay any liabilities of the PFIs regarding the
Green Transformation Fund.

SECTION 8.2 Indemnifications

The PFI releases Bangladesh Bank and covenants and agrees that Bangladesh Bank
will not be liable for and holds harmless Bangladesh Bank, and Bangladesh Bank
employees and agents from and against, any and all losses, claims, damages, liabilities
or expenses, of every conceivable kind, character and nature whatsoever arising out
of, resulting from or in any way connected with the Sub-project financed under Green
Transformation Fund.

Page 13 of 17

--- Page 15 ---
ARTICLE IX
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE BANGLADESH BANK AND
PARTICIPATING FINANCIAL INSTITUTION; ADDRESSES

SECTION 9.1 Representative of the Bangladesh Bank; Addresses

Authorized Representative: General Manager
Sustainable Finance Department
Bangladesh Bank

Address: Bangladesh Bank, Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000

Telephone: +88029530320

Facsimile: — +88029530327
Email: manoj.biswas@bb.org.bd

SECTION 9.2 Representative of the Financial Institution; Addresses

Page 14 of 17

--- Page 16 ---
ARTICLE X
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 10.1 Notices

All notices, certificates or other communications will be deemed sufficiently given on
the next day following the day on which the same have been either sent by facsimile
or mailed by registered mail, courier, postage prepaid, addressed to the Bangladesh
Bank or the PFI, as the case may be, as follows:

To Bangladesh Bank:
General Manager
Sustainable Finance Department
Bangladesh Bank (27৭ Annex Building, 19" floor),
Head Office, Motijheel, Dhaka 1000

To Financial Institution:

SECTION 10.2 Severability of Invalid Provision

If any provision of this Agreement will be held or deemed to be, or will in fact be,
illegal, inoperative or unenforceable, the same will not affect any other provision or
provisions herein contained or render the same invalid, inoperative, or unenforceable
to any extent whatever.

SECTION 10.3 Execution of Counterparts

This Agreement may be simultaneously executed in several counterparts, each of
which will be an original and all of which will constitute but one and the same
instrument.

SECTION 10.4 Amendments, Changes and Modifications

Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, this Agreement may not be
effectively amended changed, modified, altered or terminated without the written
consent of the parties to this Agreement.

SECTION 10.5 Governing Law

This Agreement will be governed exclusively by and construed in accordance with the
applicable laws of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.
Page 15 of 17

--- Page 17 ---
SECTION 10.6 Terms of the Agreement

This Agreement will be in full force and effect from the date hereof and will continue
in effect as long as any Financing given to the PFI under the Green Transformation
Fund is outstanding.

SECTION 10.7 Binding Effect

This Agreement will inure to the benefit of and will be binding upon the GTF, the PFI
and their respective successors and assigns, however, to the limitations contained in
Article IV.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, জয়া রা has caused this Agreement to be
executed in its name and its corporate seal to be hereunto affixed and attested by its
duly authorized officers, and the Bangladesh Bank as the Administrator of the Fund,
has caused this Agreement to be executed, all as of the date first above written.

[PFI SEAL] [Signature]

[Namie 0 "authorized PRI
representative)

[SEAL]

BANGLADESH BANK

[Signature]
[BB SEAL]
General Manager
Sustainable Finance Department
[SEAL]
WITNESS:
1, [Signature]

[Name and designation of witness from BB]
[SEAL]
2 [Signature]
[Name and designation of witness from PFI]

[SEAL]
Page 16 of 17

--- Page 18 ---
SCHEDULE 1
PROMISSORY NOTE
(to be on letter head pad)
Principal Amount:

Interest Rate:
Date of Note:

PROMISE TO PAY. (AD) promises to pay to
(BANGLADESH BANK), or order, in lawful money of
the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, the principal amount

of 05 Dollar/Euro in figure (05 Dollar/Euro
in words), together with interest on

the unpaid principal balance/outstanding amount from , until
paid in full.

PAYMENT. [AD/PFI] will pay this loan in ____ payments of US Doilar/Euro

each payment. AD's first payment is due on , and all subsequent
payments are due on the same day of each after that. AD's final payment will
be due on , and will be for all principal and all accrued interest not yet

paid. Payments include principal and interest. Interest on this Note is computed on a
365/365 simple/compound interest basis; that is, by applying the ratio of the annual
interest rate over the number of days in a year (366 during leap years), multiplied by the
outstanding principal balance, multiplied by the actual number of days the principal
balance is outstanding. AD will pay FRTMD /BANGLADESH BANK _ at
FRTMD/BANGLADESH BANK's address shown above or at such other place as
FRTMD /BANGLADESH BANK may designate in writing. Unless otherwise agreed or
required by applicable law, payments will be applied first to accrued unpaid interest, then
to principal, and any remaining amount to any unpaid collection costs and late charges.

INTEREST RATE. The interest rate on this Note is

PRIOR TO SIGNING THIS NOTE, AD READ AND UNDERSTOOD ALL THE PROVISIONS
OF THIS NOTE. AD AGREES TO THE TERMS OF THE NOTE AND ACKNOWLEDGES
RECEIPT OF A COMPLETED COPY OF THE NOTE.

Name of the Sub-project:

Name of PFI

Signature

Authorized Signatory(ies)

Title(s)

Witness(es)

Date Signed

Page 17 of 17