--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
www.bb.org.bd
FE Circular No. 07






Date: February 16, 2014

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Reporting of import transactions under buyers’ credits/suppliers’
credits and matching of Bill of Entry

Attention of the Authorized Dealers (ADs) is invited to paragraph 21, chapter 2 of Guidelines
for Foreign Exchange Transactions (GFET), Vol-2 regarding the reporting procedure for imports under
foreign loans and grants.

02. In order to facilitate reporting against import transactions under buyers’ credits/approved
external credits for which payment is made by foreign lenders at sight as per payment terms, it has
been decided that ADs shall report the transactions under schedule EL-1 (as per amended format,
copy enclosed) through issuance of IMP Form to Bangladesh Bank. Particulars of the EL-1 should
also be reported in a separate schedule J/O-3 together with Form C to Bangladesh Bank. ADs should
mark IMP Form, Schedule J/O-3 and Form C with bold letters “BC” or “EC” (as the case may be).
While making the payment to foreign lenders on maturity, ADs shall report the transactions as
settlement of buyers’ credit along with interest using TM Form under schedule E-3/P-3.

03. It has also been decided that ADs shall issue IMP Form for import under suppliers’ credits
on acceptance of import documents and report the transactions under schedule EL-3 (as per amended
format, copy enclosed) to Bangladesh Bank. Particulars of the EL-3 should also be reported in a
separate schedule J/O-3 together with Form C to Bangladesh Bank. ADs should mark IMP Form,
Schedule J/O-3 and Form C with bold letters “SC”. While making the payment to foreign suppliers
on maturity, ADs shall report the transactions as settlement of suppliers’ credit along with interest
using TM Form under schedule E-3/P-3.

04. Paragraph 31, chapter 7 of GFET-2009, Vol-1 requires matching of authenticated copy of
the bill of entry/customs certified invoice with duplicate IMP form and invoice of relevant import
within four months from the date of import payment. This is to clarify that in case of import under
buyers’ credits/suppliers’ credits, ADs shall match authenticated copy of the bill of entry/customs
certified invoice with duplicate IMP Form issued in accordance with paragraph 2 and 3 above and
relevant invoice.

05. Other instructions of paragraph 21, chapter 2 of GFET, Vol-2 and paragraph 31, chapter 7
of GFET, Vol-1 will remain unchanged.

Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of all concerned.

Yours faithfully,
Enclosure: As stated

(Md. Jahirul Hoque)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 9512604

--- Page 2 ---
See Chapter 2
Para 21

SCHEDULE-EL-1/EL-2/EL-3
(Imports under Loans/Grants/Suppliers’ Credits/Buyers’ Credits/Approved External Credits)

Period


Name of Authorised Dealer


Currency


Particulars of Loan


SI.
No.

IMP
Form No.
Quantity

Unit Unit Volume
Code

Amount in
Currency
Code Number
Country
Commodity
Category



































































































































































































































































































































































































































































TOTAL:


















Signature:
Date : .......................... Office Seal Stamp with name, designation & Phone no.


App. 47