--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
www.bb.org.bd
FE Circular No. 16
Date: 30 March, 2014
Head Offices/Principal Offices of all Authorized Dealers
in Foreign Exchange Transactions.

Dear Sirs,
Submission of information regarding transactions in foreign exchange market
and exchange rates through Online Foreign Exchange Market Monitoring System
Your attention is invited to the Para 23 and 24 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions,
2010 (Vol-2) read with letter no. ‰egybx(wemkv)/01/2002 dated 09/12/2002 and the following statements (Table-1)
regarding submission of information on foreign exchange market related transactions, exchange rates and inflow
and outflow of foreign exchange :
Table-1
Sl. No.
Name of the Statement
References
Inter-bank Foreign Exchange Transactions
Para 23, Chapter 2, Guidelines for
Foreign Exchange Transactions (Vol-2)
Statement of Day-End Balances in Nostro Accounts
Daily Foreign Exchange Rates for Dealing with
Public/Non-bank customers
Two Way Quotation for Inter-bank Foreign Exchange
Transactions
Statement of Un-reconciled Entries of Nostro Accounts
(Month end)
Para 24, Chapter 2, Guidelines for
Foreign Exchange Transactions (Vol-2)
Statement of Receipt and Projection of Foreign Exchange
& Statement of Payment and Projected Payment of
Foreign Exchange.
Letter No. ‰egybx(wemkv)/01/2002; Dated:
09.12.2002
As part of ongoing automation program of Bangladesh Bank, with a view to making the foreign
exchange market monitoring system more dynamic and effective, an web-based platform under the title “ Online
Foreign Exchange Market Monitoring System” has been developed for submission of the above statements
through online instead of hard copy. In lieu of the above mentioned 6 statements, ADs are now advised to
submit the following 7(seven) statements in different intervals through the above mentioned online web portal
of Bangladesh Bank.
Contd.../2
Translated

--- Page 2 ---
Table-2
The short description of submitting the above mentioned statements are given below:
1. Daily Statement of Inter-Bank and Cross Border Foreign Exchange Transactions: ADs shall submit the
information regarding buying and selling of foreign exchange (spot, forward, swap) with all correspondent
banks and OBUs located in Bangladesh or outside on daily basis through designated web portal.
2. Daily Statement of Foreign Exchange Rates: The following Foreign Exchange Rates mentioned in
Exchange Rate Sheet of banks are to be submitted within 11.00 a.m. of each working day:
(i) Buying rates for Cash, TT Clean, OD Sight, OD Transfer, 1m forward, 3m forward, 6m forward, 1y
forward, 1m usance Export Bill, 3m usance Export Bill, 6m usance Export Bill, 1y usance Export Bill,
Export Bill Collection.
(ii) Selling rates for Cash, BC, TT & OD, 1m forward, 3m forward, 6m forward, 1y forward.
This is to mention here that bank shall have to submit above mentioned daily exchange rates (if any) of
those currencies which it usually publishes in its daily exchange rate sheet. If any exchange rate of any
bank changes after submitting it in web portal, bank will have to submit the changed rate to the web portal
immediately.
Banks have to submit interbank buying and selling rate of US Dollar in the same portal (Two way Quotations
for Inter-bank Foreign Exchange Transactions).
3. Daily Statement of Deal Rates with Exchange Houses: Authorized Dealers buy foreign exchange from
Exchange Houses. Currency-wise maximum and minimum exchange rates of foreign exchange bought from
exchange houses of any working day have to be submitted through designated web portal within 11.00 a.m. of
the next working day. To mention, only maximum and minimum rates are to be quoted regardless of number
of transactions.
4. Daily Statement of Quoted Rate to Exchange Houses: Authorized Dealers quote different exchange rates to
buy foreign exchange from Exchange Houses. Quoted exchange rate for buying foreign exchange has to be
submitted immediately through online web portal. To mention, only currency-wise maximum and minimum
rates are to be reported. For example, first quoted rate of a currency will be considered as maximum and
minimum rate of that currency simultaneously. Any subsequent change in this rate will be reported as
maximum or minimum (as the case may be) exchange rate of this currency.
Sl. No.
Name of the Statement
Frequency
Daily Statement of Inter-Bank and Cross Border Foreign Exchange
Transactions
Daily Basis
Daily Statement of Foreign Exchange Rates
Daily Statement of Deal Rates with Exchange Houses
Daily Statement of Quoted Rates to Exchange Houses
Daily Statement of Day end Balances in Nostro Accounts
Monthly Statement of Unadjusted Entries of Nostro Accounts
Monthly Basis
Monthly Foreign Exchange Inflow-Outflow Statement
Contd.../3

--- Page 3 ---
5. Daily Statement of Day-End Balances in Nostro Accounts: Information regarding balances held in
different nostro accounts (account-wise deposits, placements, investments, etc.) at the end of each working
day will have to be submitted by 2.00 p.m. of the subsequent working day to the designated web portal. This
is to mention here that information regarding balances held in one or more than one OBUs will also have to
be reported.

6. Monthly Statement of Unadjusted Entries of Nostro Accounts: After each month, AD bank shall have to
report information regarding number and volume of unreonciled entries of nostro accounts (as per both local
and foreign book) and reconciliation of unreconciled entries of respective nostro accounts through designated
web portal within 7th instant of the next month.

7. Monthly Foreign Exchange Inflow-Outflow Statement: Actual of previous month and projected of next
month information of inflows and outflows of foreign exchange shall have to be submitted on monthly basis
in designated format through the web portal within 10th instant of each month.

Detail description/instructions for submitting above statements in web portal have been given in „User
Guidelines‟ attached with the web portal.

AD Bank shall start submission of statements mentioned in serial no. 1 to 5 given in Table-2 of page 2
from 1st April, 2014 and statements mentioned in serial no. 6 and 7 of the same table (based on April 30, 2014) on
trial basis from May 02, 2014. However, submission of statements mentioned in Table -1 will continue during this
period as usual. Regular submission of statements mentioned in Table-2 will start from 1st July, 2014. Since,
statements in Table-2 will be started instead of statements mentioned in Table-1 from July 01, 2014; submission
of hardcopies of statements mentioned in Table-1 will no longer be required from that day; but hardcopies of
required statements based on 30th June, 2014 shall have to be submitted even after that day. This is to mention
here that the submission of hardcopy of “Quarterly Statement of Unreconciled Nostro Account” will remain
unchanged under the existing system.

Technical problem (if any) faced during submission of the statements through web portal are required to
be communicated through e-mail to Mr. Mohammad Bazlul Karim (bozlul.karim@bb.org.bd), Programmer or Mr.
Hasan Al Mamun (hasan.mamun@bb.org.bd), System Analyst of Bangladesh Bank immediately. Besides, for any
clarification/information related to statements to be submitted, ADs may contact Foreign Exchange Policy
Department, Bangladesh Bank through email (fepd.femp2@bb.org.bd) or by phone to 9530298.


Yours faithfully
Signed\-
(Jagannath Chandra Ghosh)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 9530092