--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office, Dhaka.
www.bb.org.bd.

FE Circular No. 04






Date : 14 February, 2016

All Authorized Dealers of
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Foreign Exchange Regulations applicable for enterprise and developers
operating in Economic Zones (EZs) in Bangladesh
1. Introduction : By an Act of Parliament, namely ‘The Bangladesh Economic Zones Act, 2010 (Act No. 42
of 2010), attached herewith, Economic Zones (EZ) will be established in all potential areas including
backward and underdeveloped regions under the auspicious and supervision of the Bangladesh Economic
Zones Authority (BEZA). The broad features relating to the operations of the industrial enterprises in the
zones will be contained in the 'Principles and Procedures governing setting up of industries in Economic
Zones' to be issued by BEZA.
2. Division of an economic zone into several areas: As per the said Act, any economic zone may be divided
into the following areas :
(a) Export Processing Area- Specified for export oriented industries;
(b) Domestic Processing Area- Specified for industries to be established to meet the demand of the
domestic market;
(c) Commercial Area- Specified for business organizations, banks, warehouses, offices or any other
organization;
(d) Non-processing Area- Specified for residence, health, education, amusement etc.
3. Foreign Exchange Transactions by the Entities in EZs
Foreign exchange regulations applicable for persons resident in Bangladesh shall be applicable equally for
the entities in EZs also, if not otherwise directed by Bangladesh Bank. The summary of these regulations are
enumerated in Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions (GFET) (Vol.- 1 and 2) published by
Bangladesh Bank (BB), Foreign Exchange Circulars and Circular Letters issued/published by Bangladesh
Bank (BB) from time to time in its website. However, based on the division of economic zone areas, the
exchange regulations may be categorized under the following two broad heads:
A. Foreign exchange regulations for the units located in ‘Export Processing Areas (EPAs) of EZs.

--- Page 2 ---
B. Foreign exchange regulations for the entities of EZs other than as mentioned in 'A' above. Besides,
developers of the EZs including those of with foreign investment (owned wholly or partly by foreign
individuals/institutions) will fall under this category in terms of applicable foreign exchange regulations.
4. Foreign exchange regulations for the units located in ‘EPAs of EZs :
For foreign exchange regulation purpose, the units located in the EPAs of EZs shall be categorized as
follows:
(a) Type A: 100 percent foreign owned including those owned by Bangladeshi nationals ordinarily resident
abroad;
(b) Type B: Joint venture projects between foreign and Bangladesh entrepreneurs resident in Bangladesh;
(c) Type C: 100 percent Bangladeshi entrepreneurs resident in Bangladesh.
(I) Exports from EPAs of EZs : Exports from EPAs of EZs (including sales to Bangladesh like within the
same EZ, in other EZs, in EPZs, other areas of Bangladesh) are subject to the usual requirement of
declaration of exports in 'EXP' Form and repatriation of export proceeds mentioned in Chapter 8 of the
GFET 2009 (Vol-1) and related FE Circular/Circular Letters issued thereafter. For identification, EXP Forms
for these exports should be rubber stamped or over printed with words " "EXPORT FROM EZ" in bold
letters. Proceeds from such exports by entities of different types shall be retained and used through foreign
currency accounts as mentioned in Section V, Chapter 13, GFET (Vol-1). Besides, equity from foreign shareholders
and loan received in foreign currency from authorized sources may be credited in such foreign currency accounts of
Type A and Type B units of EZs as above. Exporters of such areas may maintain Taka accounts in the same manner as
mentioned in Section V of Chapter 13.
(II) Sale of Bangladeshi goods or raw materials or nonphysical contents to EZ enterprises : Sales of Bangladeshi
goods or raw materials or nonphysical contents to units located in the EPAs of EZs against payment in foreign
currency shall be treated as exports from Bangladesh in accordance with Foreign Exchange Regulation Act
1947 (as amended upto Sep 09, 2015). Therefore, normal foreign exchange regulations concerning
declaration of exports on EXP Forms in case of export in physical form and repatriation of proceeds is
applicable to these exports to the units of EPAs of EZs.
(III) Import by units of EPAs : For import by the units of EPAs of EZs, ADs shall abide by the
instructions as mentioned in Para 20, Section -II, Chapter 16, GFET, 2009 (Vol-1). For reporting, usual IMP
Form reporting procedures will, however, be applicable for imports (including admissible imports from
Bangladesh or EPZs or other areas of EZ) by EZ enterprises ( EPAs and other areas) from abroad.
(IV) Credit Facilities : For obtaining credit facilities by the units of EZs in EPAs, instructions mentioned in

--- Page 3 ---
Section -II, Chapter 16 of GFET, 2009 (Vol-1) shall be applicable. However, for obtaining medium and long
term debt from abroad/ OBU, borrowing approval applications shall have to be submitted to Bangladesh Bank
through BEZA following the procedures as mentioned in FEID Circular Letter No. 03, dated May 06, 2014.
(V) Contribution of shareholders in Type B Units : In case of contribution of shareholders in Type B Units ,
relevant instructions as mentioned in Para 21, Section-II, Chapter 16 GFET, 2009 (Vol-1) shall be applicable.
(VI) Import by type C units of EZs : In case of type C units of EZs in EPAs , if foreign currency balance is
not sufficient to cover the cost of machinery and equipment to be imported from abroad, the shortfall may be
made up, with prior Bangladesh Bank approval, by conversion of Taka into foreign currency .
(VII) Repatriation of dividend to non-resident Shareholders of Type A and B units of EPAs of EZs:
ADs/(including OBUs in case of Type A units) may remit dividends favoring non-resident shareholders of
Type A and B units of EPAs of EZs without prior permission of Bangladesh Bank following the procedures
mentioned in Para 31, Chapter 10, GFET (Vol-1). Besides, before effecting such remittances,
instructions/regulations of BEZA (if any) are to be complied on meticulously.
(VIII) Repatriation of investment/capital by non-resident share holders
Subject to adherence to the instructions of BEZA, Guidelines for effecting remittance of sales proceeds of
non-residents' investment in Bangladesh will be similar as mentioned in Para 3, Chapter 9, GFET (Vol-1) and
FE Circular 32 , dated August 31, 2014.
5. Foreign Exchange Regulations for the entities of EZs outside EPAs including developers of EZs.

Foreign exchange regulations for the entities of EZs (other than the entities situated in EPAs of the EZs) will
be similar with those of situated outside EPZs and EPAs of EZs. Locally owned/controlled zone developers
and industrial units in EZs will have to follow the similar exchange regulations like the entities outside EZs
and EPZs. Likewise, foreign owned or foreign controlled entities/zone developers of EZs will follow the
similar exchange regulations which are applicable for similar entities (foreign owned or foreign controlled)
outside EZs and EPZs. However, the BEZA shall make arrangement to facilitate the foreign
owned/controlled industrial units and zone developers in respect of concerned issues which may include
issuing permission for repatriation of capital and dividends, royalties and technical fees, etc. Foreign
exchange regulations for foreign investment in Bangladesh are enumerated in different chapters of the said
Guidelines and FE Circulars/Circular Letters issued by Bangladesh Bank from time to time. Such regulations
(for foreign investment) shall also be applicable for investment in EZs.
(I) Foreign investment in Bangladesh : In case issuance of share in favour of non-residents, transfer of
Bangladeshi shares and securities, opening Taka account, remittance of sales proceeds of non-residents'

--- Page 4 ---
investment in Bangladesh, etc. relevant instructions of Chapter 9 of GFET, 2009 (Vol-1) shall be applicable
as well.
(II) Repatriation of profit /Dividend abroad:
Procedures for remittance of profit/dividend favoring non-resident shareholders shall be similar with units
of EPAs as mentioned in Para 4(VII) of this circular.
(III) Borrowing locally (in local currency) and borrowing from abroad: For borrowing locally (in local
currency) by the foreign controlled companies, instructions mentioned in Chapter 16, GFET, 2009(Vol.-1)
shall be applicable for units in EZs. For borrowing from abroad by the foreign controlled companies,
instructions mentioned in Chapter 15 of GFET, 2009(Vol.-1) shall be applicable. Besides, foreign
owned/controlled industrial enterprises in Bangladesh may access to interest free loans for working capital
other than input procurements from parent companies/shareholders abroad for upto one year without any
prior approval of Bangladesh Bank.
6. Working in EZs by foreign nationals: Foreign nationals working in EZs (with valid work permit issued
by BEZA) are allowed to remit through an AD 75% of net salary, 100% of leave salary and actual savings
and pension benefits without prior Bangladesh Bank approval [Chapter 11, GFET, 2009 (Vol-1) and FE
Circular No 06, 15/04/2013]. Such foreign nationals working/residing in Bangladesh may open and maintain
foreign currency accounts in Bangladesh with inward remittance received from abroad. Balances of such
accounts are freely remittable abroad [Chapter 13, GFET, 2009 (Vol-1).
7. Reporting : Investment in EZs shall have to be reported to BB as per instructions mentioned in Para 2,
Chapter 9, GFET (Vol-1) and Para 26, Chapter 02 GFET (Vol-2). Besides, all foreign exchange transactions
of EZ units are to be reported through online foreign exchange transaction reporting platform of Foreign
Exchange Operation Department, BB. Such transactions are also be reported in monthly returns to BB in
relevant statements and schedules, etc.
ADs are advised to provide necessary support to the investors of EZs. For any clarification, General
Manager, Foreign Exchange Policy Department, BB may be contacted at gm.fepd@bb.org.bd,
fepd.femp1@bb.org.bd.
This FE Circular is issued under the authority of Section 20(3) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act 1947
(Act VII of 1947, amended upto Sep 09, 2015). Please bring the contents of the circular to all concerned.
Yours faithfully,

(Jagannath Chandra Ghosh)
Deputy General Manger
Phone : 9530092

--- Page 5 ---
গণপ্রজাতন্ত্রী বাংলাদেশ সরকার
আইন, বিচার ও সংসদ বিষয়ক মন্ত্রণালয়
লেজিসলেটিভ ও সংসদ বিষয়ক বিভাগ

প্রজ্ঞাপন
তারিখ, ২১ জুন ২০১২ ইং

নং ০৯ (আঃম)(লেঃস)(মুঃপ্রঃ)-আইন-অনুবাদ-২০১২-___সরকারি কার্যবিধিমালা, ১৯৯৬ এর
প্রথম তফসিল (বিভিন্ন মন্ত্রণালয় এবং বিভাগের মধ্যে কার্যবন্টন) এর আইটেম.৩০ এর ক্রমিক ৭ ও ১০
এবং মন্ত্রিপরিষদ বিভাগের বিগত ৩-৭-২০০০ ইং তারিখের সভায় গৃহীত সিদ্ধান্ত বাস্তবায়নের নিমিত্ত
The Bangladesh Economic Zones Act, 2010 (Act No. 42 of 2010) এর ইংরেজী

মোঃ দেলোয়ার হোসেন
সহকারী সচিব (চঃ দাঃ) |

(১১৭৬১৩) হি
মূল্য 8 টাকা ২০.০০

--- Page 6 ---
১১৭৬১৪ বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অত্তিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২

The Bangladesh Economic Zones Act, 2010
Act No. 42 of 2010
| Ist August 2010]

An act to make provisions for the establishment of economic zones in all
potential areas including backward and underdeveloped regions and
development, operation, management and control thereof including the matters
yncillary thereto with a view to encouraging rapid economic development
ed increase and diversification of industry, employment, production and

11,

it

WHEREAS it is expedient and necessary to make provisions for the
blishment of economic zones in all potential areas including backward and
J leveloped regions and development, operation, management and control
eof including the matters ancillary thereto with a view to encouraging rapid
jomic development through increase and diversification of industry,
loyment, production and export.

THEREFORE, it is hereby enacted as follows :—

|. Short title and commencement—(1) This Act may be called ac:
We Economic Zones Act, 2010.

(2) It shall come into force at once.

2. Definitions—tin this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the
91৩০1 or context,—

(1) “Economic zone” means any economic zone declared by the
Government under section 5;

(2) “Economic zone developer” means any economic zone developer
appointed under section 8;

(3) “Authority” means the Authority established under section 17;
(4) “Governing Board” means the Governing Board of the Authority; /
(5) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Governing Board:

(6) “Executive Board” means the Executive Board of the Authority;

(7) “Executive Chairman” means the Chairman of the Executive
Board;


বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২ ১১৭৬১৫

“Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act, and
until such rules are made by the orders published in the official
Gazette by the Government:

@P Regulation” means regulations made under this Act;
(10) “Rules” means rules made under this Act:

(11) “Secretary” means the Secretary of the Authority.
eo
3. Act to override other laws.—Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, the provisions of this act shall prevail.

(085৮৮ of জাত momes—For the purposes of this Act, the
government may, with a view to encouraging rapid economic development in

potential areas including backward and underdeveloped regions of the country
through increase and diversification of industry, employment, production and
export and to implement the social and economic commitments of the State,
establish any of the following categories of economic zones, such as :—

(a) Economic Zones established through public and private partnership
by local or foreign individuals, body or organizations;

(b) Private Economic Zones established individually or jointly by local,
non-resident Bangladeshis or foreign investors, body, business
organizations or groups;

(c) Government Economic Zones established and owned by the
Government;

(d) Spegial Economic Zones established privately or by public-private
partnership or by the Government initiative, for the establishment
of any kind of specialized industryo or commercial organization.

5. Site selection and declaration of পপ zones.—(1) For the purposes _
of this Act, the Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, select

any specific land area as an economic zone and declare it as an economic zone.

(2) The Schedule of Gazette notification issued under sub-section (1) shall
contain specific description of the land declared as an economic zone.

MRewitsanine anything contained in sub-section (1), for the purposes
of this Act, no economic zone shall be declared on any land within City
Corporation, Municipality or Cantonment Board area.

Ps s 4
nt te ৪১১৯০০৪৮৮০৯

--- Page 7 ---
৯১৭৬১৬ বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২.

6 Acquisition of land for economic zones.—(1) For the purposes of this

Act, the Government> may, acquire any land under the Acquisition and

Requisition of Immoyable Property Ordinance, 1982 (Ordinance No. 11 of 1982)

if required for an economic zone or for infrastructure thereof such as-roads,

bridges etc.

রি (2) For the disposal of any other matters including the compensation of the
Jand acquired under sub-section (1), the provisions of the Ordinance mentioned
51০ (1) shall apply.

oi! (3) The land acquired under this section shall be deemed to required for
public interest.

(1) The Authority
ue necessary orders to prepare a master plan for the land connected with
economic zone dividing it into the following areas :-—

ঠা - (a) Export Processing Area : Specified for export-oriented industries:

(6) Domestic Processing Area : Specified for industries to be
established to meet the demand of the domestic market;

(c) Commercial Area: Specified for business organizations, banks,
warehouses, offices or any other organization;

(0) Non-Processing Area: Specified for residence, health, education
amusements, etc.


(2) Any economic zone master plan prepared on the basis of the order
d under sub-section (1) shall be submitted to the Authority for approval,

ind, if it is approved by the Authority, the divided areas under such plan shail be

ie specified part of that zone.

18 ‘Appointment of economic zone developers.— For the purposes of this
ct, the Authority may appoint economic zone developers in such manner as
ay be presctibed.

e Authority may, from time
ermine the category of industrial and commercial organizations established in
an economic zone with a view to providing with benefits.

10, Special tariff benefits for economic zones Notwithstanding
ything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Government

০০-০৭-১০০০ 88৯০

ay by notification in the official Gazette, provide with tariff benefits to 116...


বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২ ১১৭৬১৭

economic zone or any area of it, for a specific period, and, in accordance with the
provisions of the Customs Act, 1969 (Act No. IV of 1969), introduce special
arrangement to facilitate import and export operations of the organizations:
established in the economic zone.

11. Financial benefits, ete—{1) The Government shall provide with such
kind of financial incentives and benefits to the industrial units within the
economic zones as is provided to the industrial units under Bangladesh Export
Processing Zones Authority Act, 1980 (Act No. XXXVI of 1980 ) and
‘Bangladesh Private Export Processing Zones Act, 1996 (Act No. XX of 1996).

(2) The Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, arrange for
«special incentives to the exporters outside the economic zone,

; 12. Other benefits.—The Authority shall—

(a) make arrangements to facilitate the economic zone developers and

’ industrial units in respect of legal documents which include
permission for economic zone site selection, declaration of
economic zones, clearances, certificates, certificate of origin

©) permit. for repaint ar vei resident and
ants non-resident visas, work permits, construction permits etc. through

a one-stop service; and

09) subject to the provision of section 16, make arrangements to allot
oe or lease plots suitable for setting up industries on complete
ft commercial basis.

13. Power to exempt from application of certain laws.—The
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, exempt a zone or any
“ organization thereof from the application of all or any of the provisions of all or
any of the following Acts, or may pass order that the acts or any provision
thereof shall, in its application to a zone, be subject to such modification or
amendments as may be specified therein, namely :—

(a) Municipal Taxation Act, 1881 (Act No. XI of 1881);

(b) Explosives Act, 1884 (Act No. IV of 1884);

(c) Stamp Act, 1899 (Act No.II of 1899);

(d) Electricity Act, 1910 (Act No. IX of 1910);

(e) Boilers Act, 1923 (Act No. V. of 1923);

(f) Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (Act No. ৬11 of 1947),
(g) Income Tax Ordinance, 1984 (Ordinance No. XXXVI of 1984);

--- Page 8 ---
১১৭৬১৮ বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২

(h) Building Construction Act, 1952 (E.B. Act No. 11 of 1953);

(i) Land Development Tax Ordinance, 1976 (Ordinance No. XLII of
1976);

(j) Local Government (Union Parishad) Act, 2009 (Act No. LXI of
2009);

(k),. Fire Prevention and Extinction Act, 2003 (Act No. VII of 2003);

(1) Value Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No, XXII of 1991);

(m) Bangladesh Labour Act, 2006 (Act No. XLII of 2006);

(n) Local Government (City Corporation) Act, 2009 (Act No. LX of
2009); Mi

(0) Local Government (Municipalities) Act, 2009 (Act No, LVIII of
2009);

(p) Any other Act, prescribed by the Government by notifications in
the official Gazette.

ab ar ln ar enc gg
Authority may subject to the approval of Bangladesh Bank, allow banking

activities by any bank in any economic zone.

চি. 158400০০০৮5 জা none Expt the sci
identified as reserved industries in the existing industrial policy of the

Government, establishment of any sector such as agricultural farms, service-
oriented organizations etc. including small and cottage industry may be set up in
the economic zones established under this act.

16. Allotment of land, ete— When an individual is permitted to establish
an industry or commercial organization in an economic zone under section 15,
the Authority shall, on such conditions as determined by it, allot him any land,
building or site within the economic zone, or shall lease the same by rent or
otherwise.

17. Establishment of the Authority—{1) As soon as may be after the
commencement of this Act, the Government, for the purposes of this Act, by
notification in the official Gazette, shall establish an Authority to be called the
Bangladesh Economic Zones Authority for the purposes of this Act.

(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession
and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.

= a | See

বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২ ১১৭৬১৯

(3) Until the Authority is established under sub-section (1), the Government
may, for the time being, assign any of the organizations under its control, the
responsibility for performing its activities as the Authority.

18. Head office of the Authority, ete-—The Head office of the Authority
shall be located in Dhaka and if necessary, the Authority may, with the prior
approval of the Government, establish branch offices at any place in Bangladesh.

‘ 19. Duties and functions of the Authority—The general duties and
functions of the Authority shall be as follows, namely :—

* (1) to identify and select sites for industrial or similar sectors on
availability of local resources including infrastructure, roads and
communications, travel and banking facilities and skilled man-
power for ensuring efficient utilization of land in the light of
clustering principles;

(2) to acquire land for economic zones identified by own initiative or
public-private partnership and take possession of the acquired land
on behalf of the Government;

(4) to prepare infrastructure development plans of economic zones for
implementation and management of own establishment and submit
it to the Governing Board for approval;

(5) to allot or lease or rent of land, building or site, on competitive.
commercial basis in prescribed manner, to investors applied for
establishing industrial units, businesses and service providers in
economic zones for implementation and management of their
establishment;

_ (6) to. ensure infrastructure development of economic zones within
specified period through monitoring of activities of its own and of
economic zone developers;

(7) to create Opportunities for employment through establishing
backward linkage industries within or outside economic zones by

promoting local and foreign investment includi
skilled labour force: ig including development of

১০০০৯ উল উজ. ০...” ._ উ -:৮৯৯:৯

--- Page 9 ---
৫) to ensure efficient use of land in the light of clustering principles by
dividing the land based on infrastructure and on availability of local
resources to provide a conducive environment and facilities within
economic zones;

R i (9) 10 encourage more efficient management and monitor programmers
? for implementing commitments on environment and other matters;

(10) to take steps to establish backward linkage industries in economic
é zones to meet the requirements of local economy; ৮

(11) to encourage business organizations to relocate polluting and
unplanned industries from metropolitan cities through establishing
separate economic zones for different industries: a

(12) to encourage public-private partnership in the ০751 and
operation of economic zones; .

(13) to take necessary steps to implement social and economic
commitments; ;


© (14) toestablish the এও 91 তা to ensure theie 8 and to
establish conducive relationships between owners and workers;

implement _povert ction
implemen oft va x

te মি... রি
(16) to expedite implenineation of industrial জন রা the ৩ by
promoting planned industrialization of the thrust manufacturing and

service sectors; and : el

(17) to convert the areas declared as economic zones feo economic
centers by developing industrial cities, agro-based industrial zones,
trade zones and tourism zones through investment of banking
sectors and to facilitate availability of skilled labour and efficient
service provisions.


20. Operation ete. of the Authority—( 1) The operation জননী
of the Authority shall vest in an Executive Board and the Executive Board may,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), exercise all powers and perform all
functions as may be exercised and performed by the Authority.

(2) The Executive Board in discharging its duties or performing 115
functions shall follow the orders, directives and guidelines given by the
Governing Board from time to time and the Executive Board shall in the exercise
of its powers and performing its functions, be accountable to the Governing

বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২ ১১৭৬২১

21. Governing Board.—(1) For the purposes of this Act, and subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), there shall be a Board to be called the Governing
Board consist of the following members, namely :—






the Prime Minister or a member nominated by the Prime Minister,
who is a Minister, and he shall also be the Chairman of the
Governing Board;

the Ministers/State Ministers of the Ministries or Divisions of
Industries, Commerce, Finance, Planning, Science and Information
and Communication Technology, Power, Energy and Mineral
Resources, Communications, Labour and Employment, Environment
and Forests, ex officio;

the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister, ex officio;
the Governor, Bangladesh Bank, ex officio;
the Executive Chairman, Board of Investment, ex officio;

the Secretaries of the Ministries/Divisions of Industries, Commerce,
Finance, Planning, Agriculture, Labour and Employment, Posts and
Telecommunications, Science and Information and Communication
Technology, Foreign Affairs, Energy and) Mineral Resources,
Power, Home, Shipping, Environment and Forests and the Prime
Minister’s Office, and the Chairman, National Board of Revenue,
ex officio;

the President, Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce
and Industries (FBCCI), ex officio;

the representatives of the Chambers of Commerce and Industry of
the districts relevant 10 economic zones, to be nominated by the
Government;

two women entrepreneurs to be nominated by the Government,

the President of the Specialized Chamber of Commerce and
Industry;

the Executive Chairman, ex officio, who shall also be its Secretary.

(2) Persons mentioned in clause (j) of sub-section (1) shall be the member
of Governing Board by rotation in such manner as may be prescribed.

(3) The Government may, by a notification in the official Gazette, at any_
time, co-opt any person as a member of the Governing Board for the purposes
and the period as mentioned in the Gazette notification.

5), এ

--- Page 10 ---
১১৭৬২২ বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২.

22. Functions of the Governing Board, policy implementation, ০৫০
The functions of the Governing Board shall be as follows :—

(a) to formulate policy regarding development, operation, management
and control of economic zones;

(b) to monitor the activities of initiating companies engaged for
operation, administration, management and control of economic
zones;

(c) to approve proposals for establishing economic zones;

(d) to review the overall activities of the Executive Board and the |

affairs of the economic zones from time to time; and

(e) to give necessary orders or directions to the Authority to ensure
efficient management of the Authority and economic zones. °

(2) If any Ministry or Division is concerned in the implementation of any
decision taken by the Governing Board under sub-section (1), the Bangladesh
Economic Zones Authority shall, subject to the approval of the concerned
Ministry or Division, implement it.

(3) The Authority shall, by notification in the official Gazette, publish the
policies formulated, permit given, licenses granted or orders or directions issued
by the Governing Board under sub-section (1).

(4) If any notification is issued under sub-section (3), the policies, permit,
licenses and orders or directions mentioned in the notification shall be
implemented by the concerned Ministries or Divisions or Authority on priority
basis. ,

23. Meetings of the Governing Board—1) Subject to the other
provisions of this section, the Governing Board shall determine the procedure of
its meetings.

(2) The Executive Chairman, in consultation with the Chairman, shall
convene the meetings of the Governing Board and such meetings shall be held at
such time and place as may be determined by the Chairman of the Governing
Board.

(3) The Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the Governing Board
and in his absence, a member authorized by the Chairman, who is a Minister,
shall preside over the meetings.

বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২ ১১৭৬২৩

(4) The Governing Board may invite any person capable of specially
contributing to any agenda to its meetings, and such invitee may participate in the
discussion of the meeting.

24. Executive Board—{1) The Authority shall have an Executive Board
and such Board shall consist of a Chairman and three members.

(2) The Chairman of the Executive Board shall be known as the Executive
Chairman, and he shall be the chief executive of the Authority, :

(3) The Executive Chairman and the members of the Executive Board shall
be appointed by the Government and they shall discharge their duties in
accordance with the conditions prescribed by the Government.

(4) If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Executive Chairman or if he is
unable to discharge the functions of his office on account of his absence, illness
or any other cause, the Government shall make such arrangement for discharging
the functions of the Executive Chairman as it may consider expedient.

(5) No act or proceedings of the Executive Board shall be invalid or be
called in question merely on the ground of any vacancy in the office of the
Executive Chairman or member or any defect in the constitution of the Executive
Board.

25. Meetings of the Executive Board —{1) Subject to the other provisions
of this section, the Executive Board shall determine the procedure of its
meetings.

(2) The Secretary, in consultation with the Executive Chairman, shall!
convene the meetings of the Executive Board.

(3) All meetings of the Executive Board shall be held at the Head Office of
the Authority.

(4) The Executive Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the
Executive Board and in his absence, the senior most of the members shall preside
over the meeting.

26. Appointment of Secretary, officers, staff ete—(1) The Authority may
for the efficient performance of its functions, appoint such number of officers
and staff, consultants, specialists and auditors including the Secretary as are
required according to the organogram approved by the Government.

৮ li IE el উল: a i ll

--- Page 11 ---
১১৭৬২৪ বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২.

(2) The appointment and the terms and conditions of services of the
Secretary, officers and staff, consultants, specialists and auditors of the Authority
shall be determined by regulations,

(3) All officers and staff of the Authority including the Secretary shall
subject to the provisions of this Act, and the rules and regulations made there
under discharge their duties under the overall control and supervision of the
Executive Chairman.

27. Committees—The Authority may form necessary committees
consisting of the Chairman or members or any officers of the Executive Board or
any other persons in order to assist in performing its functions and the duties and
functions of such committees shall be determined by the Authority.

28. Suspension or cancellation of permit in certain cases—{1) The
Authority may at any time suspend or cancel the permit issued to an Economic
zone developer, if the Economic zone developer—

(a) is unable to discharge his duties and functions in accordance with
this Act or rules; or

(b) fails to comply with the instruction of the Governing Board
properly in accordance with this Act; or

(c) violates the conditions of the permit; or

(d) fails to discharge the duties and obligations imposed in the permit
efficiently due to financial constraints.

(2) The procedure for suspension or cancellation of permit issued to Zone
Developers under sub-section (1) shall be prescribed by rules.

29. Ability to borrow.—For the Purpose of this Act, the Authority may,
subject to the approval of the Government borrow money from any bank or
financial institutions or any other sources.

30. Funds of the Authority—{1) For the Purposes of this Act, the
Authority shall have a fund to be called the Bangladesh Economic Zone
Authority Fund to which shall be credited the following, namely :—

(a) grants and loans received from the Government;
(b) loans from any other sources approved by the Government;

(c). income received from land allotted for establishment of industries
and business units in the economic zones;

ee >



বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২ ১১৭৬২৫

(৫) rent from building leased for industries and commercial

establishment in economic zones;
(e) various fees and service charges for any service provided;
(f) profits received through public-private partnership;
(g) 16০5 and service charges received from private organizations; and

(h) money received from any other sources.

(2) The fund to the Authority shall be deposited at any scheduled bank and
such fund shall be operated in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations.

(3) The fund of the Authority shall be used to meet the expenditure in
connection with the functions of the Economic Zone Authority under this Act.

(4) After adjustment of the expenses in the respective fiscal year, the
balance of it, if any, shall be deposited in the fund of the Authority.

31. Budget—The Authority shall, by such date and from in each year as
may be fixed by the Government, submit to the Government for approval a
budget for each financial year, showing the estimated receipt and expenditure
and the sum which are likely to be required from the government during that
financial year.

32. Accounts and audit—{1) The accounts of the Authority shall be
maintained in such manner as may be prescribed by the Government.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Comptroller and Auditor-
General (Additional Functions) Act, 1974 (Act, No. XXIV of 1974), the accounts
of the Authority shall be audited by an auditor who is a Chartered Accountant
within the meaning of the Bangladesh Chartered Accountants Order, 1973
(President’s Order No. 2 of 1973) and the Authority, with the prior approval of
the Governing Board, appoint the auditor and pay him such remuneration as may
be prescribed.

(3) The auditor appointed under sub-section (2) shall examine the annual
balance sheet including the accounts and vouchers relating thereto and the list of
various books of accounts provided by the Authority.

(4) For the purposes of this section, the auditor shall at reasonable times
have access to the books, accounts and other documents of the Authority and in
relation to such accounts: examine any member of the Governing Board or:
Bxocutive Board or i নানি,

--- Page 12 ---
১১৭৬২৬. বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২

(5) The auditor shall submit a written report to the Government on the
accounts audited by him, and the following matters shall be mentioned in the

report—

(a) whether, in the opinion of the auditor, the different books of
accounts were maintained in an appropriate manner.

(b) whether there were accurate reflections of the activities of the
Authority in those books of accounts.

(c) whether such information or explanations were provided as
required by the auditor in any case; and

(d) whether those were satisfactory.

(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in other provisions of this section,
the Government may—

(a) give direction to the auditors requiring them to report to it upon the
measures taken by the Authority for protection of interest of the
Government and of the creditors, or upon the adequacy of the
procedure in auditing the accounts of the Authority,

(b) at any time, extend the scope of the audit;

চু (c) direct that a different procedure in audit be adopted or that any
৪ other examination be made by the auditors if in its opinion, the
public interest so requires.

7 33. Compliance to laws connected with environment, etc—For the
purposes of this Act, the Authority, economic zone developers, industrial units
established in economic zones, financial and business institutions shall be bound
to comply with international commitments recognized by the Government of
Bangladesh including compliance to all the existing laws on environment and
environmental protection.

34. Applicability of laws on Workers Welfare Association and
~ Industrial Relations —The provisions of the existing laws on EPZ Workers
_ Welfare Association and industrial Relations shall, with necessary modification,
be applicable to the workers of the Special Economic Zones established under
this Act.

35. Annual reports, ete—(1) The Authority shall, submit to the
Government, as soon as possible after the end of every financial year, a report on
the conduct of its affairs for that financial year.

¥ বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২ ১১৭৬২৭

(2) The Authority shall furnish the following matters to the Government,
within a period specified by the Government, namely :—

(a) the returns, accounts, statements, estimates, and statistics required
by the Government;

(b) information and comments on any specific matter required by the
Government;

(c) various papers and documents for examination or other reasons
required by the Government.

36. Specification of courts for civil cases, ete —({1) The Government may,
in consultation with the Supreme Court and by notification in the official
Gazette, specify one or more courts for the trail of civil cases arising from the
economic zones.

(2) No case under this Act shall be tried in any other court except the courts
specified under sub-section (1).

(3) Any party aggrieved by any decision given by a court specified under
sub-section (1), may within 60 (sixty) days from the date of the decision, prefer
an appeal against such decision in the High Court Division.

37. Special rights of the Authority—The Authority shall have the
following special rights, namely :—

(a) if any company, industry or commercial organization in an
economic zone owe to the Authority and remain unpaid, the
owners, directors or the Board of Directors of the company,
industry or commercial organization shall be liable in accordance
with the agreement to pay such dues from their personal assets: and
for the failure of payment thereof, the Authority shall reserve the
right to take action against the owners, directors or Board of
Directors of such company, industry or commercial organization;

(৮) if any worker, employee, executive or management official of a
company, industry or commercial organization in an economic zone
is involved in or instigates any action that leads to labour unrest,
strikes, or lockout in the industry or commercial organization, the
Authority may order the relevant commercial organization to shut
down its operations for a specified period including dismissal of the
relevant worker, employee, executive or management official, and,
for that, the Authority shall not be responsible to compensate and
loss incurred;

টিউন a AS iii ii

--- Page 13 ---
ss
১১৭৬২৮ বাংলাদেশ গেজেট, অতিরিক্ত, জুলাই ৮, ২০১২

(c) if any industry or commercial organization in an economic zone
fails to pay any outstanding dues, other dues and debts of the
Authority, the Authority may seize unilaterally the machineries,
equipments raw materials or other goods’ of that organization and
upon evaluation thereof at the rate of the Department of the Public
Works, allocate that to any other industry or commercial
organization.

38. Power to make rules.—For the purposes of this Act, the Government
may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules.

39. Power to make regulations——For the purposes of this Act, the
Authority may, by notification in the official Gazette, make regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and rules made there under, with the
prior approval of the Government.

40. Removal of difficulties —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Government may, by order published in the official
Gazette, take necessary measure for the purpose of removing such difficulties.

4}. Original and English Text —The original text of this Act shall be in
Bangla, and the Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, publish
an Authentic English Text of an authorized translation of it in English:

Provided that in the event of conflict between the Bnagla and the English
Text, the Bangla Text shall prevail.

মোঃ আবু ইউসুফ (যুগা-সচিব), উপ-পরিচালক, অতিরিক্ত wiry, বাংলাদেশ সরকারি মুদ্রণালয়, ঢাকা কর্তৃক মুদ্রিত।
আবদুর রশিদ (উপ-সচিব), উপ-পরিচালক, বাংলাদেশ ফরম ও প্রকাশনা অফিস,
তেজগাঁও, ঢাকা কর্তৃক প্রকাশিত | web site: www.bgpress.gov.bd

LI

ee সপ