--- Page 1 ---
IPFF II Project Cell
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

IPFF II Circular No. 01 Date: March 13, 2018

Chief Executive Officers (CEOs)/Managing Directors (MDs)
All Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh

Head Office

Dhaka

Dear Sirs,
Financing Facility under the Investment Promotion

and Financing Facility Il (IPFF I) Project

A Financing Agreement was signed by the Government of People’s Republic of
Bangladesh (GoB) with the International Development Association (IDA) on November 05,
2017 to carry out IPFF II Project with a view to increase long term financing for
infrastructure and to build capacity of the local financial institutions for promoting private
sector-led infrastructure financing in Bangladesh. In pursuance of section I.C, Schedule 2 of
the Financing Agreement, Finance Division, Ministry of Finance (MoF) on behalf of the
GoB, in turn, signed an Administration Agreement with Bangladesh Bank on January 17,
2018 assigning responsibility to the latter to carry out IPFF II Project on behalf of them.

02. IPFF II Project Cell of Bangladesh Bank as Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will
provide long-term Financing Facility to Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) against
government approved/endorsed investment projects for onward financing (Infrastructure
Financing) in the eligible infrastructure sectors to be carried out by private sector
investors/sponsors. The terms and conditions including operational procedures for availing
Financing Facility are detailed in the Operations Manual (OM), which is attached herewith.
Bangladesh Bank shall enter into a Master Facility Agreement with each PFI that meets the
eligibility criteria set out in the OM.

03. Scheduled commercial banks in private sector and Financial Institutions that meet the
eligibility criteria and intends to avail financing facility may apply to the Project Director of
IPFF II Project preferably by April 19, 2018.

04. Application must include all required information and documents stated in Annexure | of
the OM. Incomplete application will not be entertained.

Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of all your constituents concerned.
The circular will be effective immediately.

Sincerely yours,

Attachment: As mentioned চি Qa"

(Md. Zulkar Nayn )
Deputy General Manager, Bangladesh Bank

Deputy Project Director, IPFF II Project
Phone: 9530230

--- Page 2 ---
OPERATIONS MANUAL
of
INVESTMENT PROMOTION AND FINANCING
FACILITY II (IPFF II) PROJECT













PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION UNIT
IPFF II PROJECT CELL
BANGLADESH BANK


MARCH 2018

--- Page 3 ---
ii

Table of Contents

Sl
Contents
Page
Introduction
Objectives of IPFF II Project
Background
Implementation Arrangement
Selection of PFIs
Responsibilities of PFIs
Eligible Sectors for IPFF II Financing
Requirements of Investment Sponsor
10
Terms and Conditions for Sanctioning Infrastructure Financing
10
10
Operational Procedure for Availing Facility Loan
13
11
Repayment Mechanism
14
12
Restructuring of Facility Loan
15
13
Master Facility Agreement
15
14
Facility Access Agreement
17
15
Infrastructure Financing Agreement
18
16
Procurement
19
17
Financial Management
27
18
Monitoring and Reporting
29
19
Environmental and Social Risk Management
30

Appendix : Definitions
32

Annexure 1: Eligibility Criteria for Enlistment as PFI
36

Annexure 2: Exclusion List
40

Annexure 3: List of Environmentally and Socially Sensitive Activities
41

Annexure 4: Loan Application for Availing Facility Loan
42

Annexure 5: Document Checklist
53

Annexure 6: Summary Details of Investment Project
56

Annexure 7: Undertaking by the PFI
58

Annexure 8: Quarterly Report of PFI on Infrastructure Financing
59

Annexure 9: Figure Showing IPFF II Project Implementation Arrangements
60

Annexure 10: Grievance Redress Mechanism
61

--- Page 4 ---
iii

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
A&BD
Accounts and Budgeting Department
BB
Bangladesh Bank
BDT
Bangladeshi Taka
BIFFL
Bangladesh Infrastructure Finance Fund Limited
CAO
Chief Accountant’s Office
CIB
Credit Information Bureau
COD
Commercial Operation Date
CPTU
Central Procurement Technical Unit
DFI
Development Finance Institution
DoE
Department of Environment
DOSA
Dollar Special Account
ECAI
External Credit Assessment Institutions
ECC
Environmental Clearance
EFT
Electronic Fund Transfer
e-GP
Electronic Government Procurement
EHS
Environment, Health and Safety
EPC
Engineering, Procurement and Construction
ERD
Economic Relations Division
E & S
Environmental and Social
ESA
Environmental and Social Audit
ESAP
Environmental and Social Action Plan
ESIA
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMP
Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESMS
Environmental and Social Management System
ESPP
Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures
ESRM
Environmental and Social Risk Management
FAA
Facility Access Agreement
FAPAD
Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate
FC
Foreign Currency
FD
Finance Division
FEPD
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
FID
Financial Institutions Division
FIDP
Financial Institutions Development Project
FM
Financial Management
FRTMD Forex Reserve and Treasury Management Department
GED
General Economic Division
GoB
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
GPN
General Procurement Notice
ICB
International Competitive Bidding
ICT
Information and Communication Technology
IDA
International Development Association
IDCOL
Infrastructure Development Company Limited
IEE
Initial Environmental Examination

--- Page 5 ---
iv

IFC
International Finance Corporation
IM
Information Memorandum
IMED
Implementation Monitoring and Evaluation Division
IPDP
Indigenous People’s Development Plan
IPFF
Investment Promotion and Financing Facility
IUFR
Interim Unaudited Financial Report
L/C
Letter of Credit
LLCR
Loan Life Coverage Ratio
LoI
Letter of Intent
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
MFA
Master Facility Agreement
MoF
Ministry of Finance
MoU
Memorandum of Understanding
MRR
Materials Receipt Report
MTD
Model Tender Document
NBFI
Non-Bank Financial Institution
NCT
National Competitive Tender
NPL
Non-Performing Loan
OM
Operations Manual
OTM
Open Tendering Method
PA
Procuring Agency
PAC
Project Audit Committee
PD
Project Director
PE
Procuring Entity
PFI
Participating Financial Institution
PFP
Procurement Focal Person
PIC
Project Implementation Committee
PIU
Project Implementation Unit
PMO
Prime Minister’s Office
PO
Purchase Order
PPA
Public Procurement Act
PPP
Public Private Partnership
PPPA
Public Private Partnership Authority
PPR
Public Procurement Rules
PPSD
Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PR
Performance Rating
PSC
Project Steering Committee
RAP
Resettlement Action Plan
SCC
Site Clearance Certificate
SEID
Socio-Economic Infrastructure Division
SFD
Sustainable Finance Department
STEP
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
TA
Technical Assistance
TAPP
Technical Assistance Project Proposal

--- Page 6 ---
ToR
Terms of Reference
TSA
Technical Services Agreement
UNDB
United Nations Development Business
USD
United States Dollar

--- Page 7 ---
INVESTMENT PROMOTION AND FINANCING FACILITY II PROJECT

OPERATIONS MANUAL

1. Introduction

A ‘Financing Agreement’ was signed by the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh (GoB)
with the International Development Association (IDA) on November 05, 2017 for Euro 94.40 million
(approximately United States Dollar (USD) 100.00 million equivalent) and Special Drawing Right (SDR)
189.70 million (approximately USD 256.70 million equivalent) under IDA Credit Number 6004
(Portion A)-BD & IDA Credit Number 6005 (Portion B)-BD respectively along with USD 60.00 million
equivalent Bangladeshi Taka (BDT) counterpart fund from GoB to carry out Investment Promotion and
Financing Facility II (IPFF II) Project with a view to increase long term financing for infrastructure and
to build capacity of the local financial institutions for promoting private sector-led infrastructure
financing in Bangladesh. In pursuance of Section I.C, Schedule 2 of the Financing Agreement, Finance
Division (FD), Ministry of Finance (MoF) on behalf of the GoB, in turn, signed an Administration
Agreement with Bangladesh Bank (BB) on January 17, 2018 assigning responsibility to the latter to carry
out IPFF II Project on behalf of them. The total cost of the IPFF II Project is USD 416.70 million (BDT
327942.90 Lac equivalent). Out of this amount, USD 13.00 million (BDT 10231.00 Lac equivalent) will
be used for Technical Assistance Component and the rest USD 403.70 million (BDT 317711.90 Lac
equivalent) will be used for Long-Term Infrastructure Financing Component. The tenure of the Project is
five (5) years i.e. from July 2017 to June 2022.

This Operations Manual (OM) delineates the procedures and other relevant issues for effective
implementation of the IPFF II Project. BB, with endorsement from IDA, may amend/revise the manual
from time to time. As per Section 1.B, Schedule 2 of the Financing Agreement, BB has prepared this OM
setting out the operational and administrative procedures for Project. The scope of this OM includes:
(i) procurement and financial management procedures; (ii) eligibility criteria for selection of the
Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) and selection of Subprojects; (iii) terms and conditions for
Investment Financing; (iv) implementation of Subprojects; (v) the staffing, management and
responsibilities of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be called as IPFF II Project Cell; (vi) key
Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM) arrangements and obligations of the PIU, PFIs and
Investment Sponsors; (vii) grievance redress mechanism and enforcement of the same under IPFF II
Project.


2. Objectives of IPFF II Project

The main objective of the project is to increase long-term financing for infrastructure and to build
capacity of the local financial institutions for promoting private sector-led infrastructure financing in
Bangladesh.

--- Page 8 ---
IPFF II is designed to achieve the above objective by way of following two broad components:
Component 1 (Long-Term Infrastructure Financing Component):
Long-term financing will be provided under the IPFF II Facility (the Facility) to PFIs for further on-
lending and investment support of long-term infrastructure investments by private sector
investors/Investment Sponsor (hereinafter called Sponsor).
In addition to conventional debt, the long-term financing component will support leveraging the market
through innovative and diverse financial instruments. The instruments will include innovative debt
instruments such as promoter/sponsor loans, mezzanine financing, takeout financing facilities,
specialized project/infrastructure bonds etc. Moreover, equity and credit guarantees/credit enhancement1
will also be piloted. Bangladesh Infrastructure Finance Fund Limited (BIFFL) will take the lead in
developing innovative instruments and piloting the same based on market response and the design will be
agreed with BB and IDA. Regardless of the type of instrument and nature of claim (debt/equity)
associated with the transaction, the financing to PFIs will be in the form of on-lending (debt).2 As such, at
the BB to PFI level, treatment of financing parameters will be the same across regular debt financing and
other financial instruments, including equity and guarantees. Tentatively USD 30 (Thirty) million is
primarily earmarked for the innovative financing instruments; in case less than a full indicative amount is
used for this purpose, the funds will be utilized for traditional on-lending and vice versa.
As regards administration of equity, guarantees, and other eligible infrastructure finance instruments to
be introduced in the project, the project funds will be disbursed to the PFIs as debt, on terms and
conditions agreed for these instruments during project implementation.
Component 2 (Technical Assistance Component):
This component will provide
i) Technical assistance to Public Private Partnership Authority (PPPA) for the development of the
infrastructure project pipeline, including PPPs.
ii) Technical assistance for strengthening capacity of project stakeholders such as: government
agencies, PFIs and Investment Sponsors in the area of environmental and social risk
management in infrastructure project financing.
iii) Technical assistance to BIFFL for the development of new long-term infrastructure finance
instruments.
iv) Support to BB for Project implementation activities.



1Utilizing the project funds for guarantee reserves to be created.
2 Such instruments could expand financing options to the borrowing companies and also allow traditional lenders—banks and
nonbank financial institutions, institutional investors—to expand their provision of finance to the infrastructure projects on
improved terms (lower interest rates, longer maturities, better currency, and structuring choices) and with more options for risk
management.

--- Page 9 ---
3. Background

BB implemented a project named Investment Promotion Financing Facility (IPFF) Project with a view to
provide long-term loan for infrastructure projects and to promote the role of private sector entrepreneurs
in the development of infrastructure. IPFF started its journey back in 2007 with IDA Credit Number
4169-BD amounting USD 50.00 million. GoB contributed 20% of IDA money (USD 10.00 million
equivalent BDT) as counterpart fund. In the backdrop of utilizing the entire amount to finance some
small power plants much ahead of credit closure and having demand for long-term fund in the financial
market, the IDA extended additional financing of USD 257.00 million through IDA Credit Number
4693-BD and GoB contributed USD 50.00 million equivalent BDT as counterpart fund which was
successfully closed on December 31, 2016. Under IPFF, twelve power plants having capacity of 589
Megawatt, three water treatment plants, one inland container depot & cargo freight station, one dry-dock,
one jetty construction, two nationwide telecommunication transmission network projects, and one
hospital infrastructure project have been financed through the PFIs. However, due to huge demand for
Infrastructure Financing, GoB and IDA agreed to continue its support by way of a follow-on project IPFF
II Project to enhance long-term financing and provide Technical Assistance (TA).

4. Implementation Arrangement

4.1 Management:
i. IPFF II Project Cell of BB will act as the PIU and be responsible for overall implementation,
coordination and supervision of project activities as per Administration Agreement signed
between GoB and BB. Technical Advisors/Consultants will be appointed/hired to provide
technical support to IPFF II Project Cell in reviewing financing facility loan proposal and other
activities relating to project under Technical Services Agreements (TSA)/Contracts. Technical
Advisors/ Consultants will execute certain activities relating to IPFF II, PPPA and BIFFL as per
the TSA/contract under direct supervision of respective organizations. IPFF II Project Cell will
oversee the Technical Advisor's/Consultant’s activities under the project.
ii. Executive Director or any other official of BB nominated by Governor of BB will be the Project
Director (PD) of IPFF II Project. He/She will implement the project components with the
cooperation of FD, Economic Relations Division (ERD), PPPA and BIFFL. The PD will be the
approval authority for all Facility Loan proposals under the Project after getting concurrence from
IDA. He/She will also be the approval authority for payment of all expenses including goods,
services and consulting services under TA Component of the Project complying regulations of
GoB and/or IDA. He/She may refer cases to the Governor of BB by his own judgment during the
approval process.
iii. A Project Implementation Committee (PIC) headed by the Governor, BB and representatives3
from FD, Financial Institution Division (FID) and ERD of MoF, Socio-Economic Infrastructure
Division (SEID), General Economic Division (GED) and Implementation Monitoring and
Evaluation Division (IMED) of Ministry of Planning and Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) will

3 Finance Division with consultation of IPFF II Project Cell may increase or decrease the member/ number of representative of
the PIC.

--- Page 10 ---
meet periodically to decide on implementation aspects of the project. The PD will act as the
Member Secretary of the PIC.
iv. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) headed by the Senior Secretary/Secretary, FD and
representatives4 from FD, FID and ERD of MoF, IMED and SEID of Ministry of Planning and
PMO will meet periodically to decide on policy and major implementation aspects of the project.
The PD will act as the Member Secretary of the PSC.

4.2 IPFF II Project Management Set-up:
Following diagram summarizes the project management set-up:
































4 Finance Division may increase or decrease the member/number of representative of the PSC.

















Project
Steering
Committee
Project Audit
Committee
Project Implementation Unit
(IPFF II Project Cell)
Project Director

Project
Implementation
Committee
Deputy Project Director
Project Managers
Deputy Project Managers
Assistant Project Managers
Support Staffs

PFIs


Technical Advisors
and/or Consultants

--- Page 11 ---
4.3 Roles and Responsibilities of IPFF II Project Cell:
IPFF II Project Cell of BB will act as the PIU for IPFF II Project and be responsible for overseeing
and management of IPFF II fund. This cell will coordinate with concerned ministries, IDA, PPPA,
BIFFL, different departments and units of BB to ensure effective implementation of the Facility.
Responsibilities of IPFF II Project Cell will be as follows:

i. Identifying and selecting eligible PFIs following the criteria delineated in this manual, and signing
separate Master Facility Agreement (MFA) with the selected PFIs. PFIs’ compliance with these
eligibility criteria will be closely monitored and tracked on an on-going basis.

ii. Receiving loan applications for IPFF II facility loan from PFIs.

iii. Reviewing the loan applications to ensure that the loans are provided to the target group, and follow
proper procurement process and safeguard including environmental and social procedures.

iv. Processing withdrawal requests with IDA and GoB to make the fund available for onward
disbursement to PFIs and meeting expenses under TA.

v. Approving facility and disbursement of funds according to the policy guidelines and OM.

vi. Maintaining all disbursement records and accounts of each PFI along with supporting documents.

vii. Recovering installments (Principal and Interest) and other applicable charges from PFIs as per the
amortization schedule and OM.

viii. Conducting off-site monitoring supported by on-site inspection, if needed both, at the PFIs and the
ultimate borrower entities/Sponsors in order to ensure the effective utilization of the facility.

ix. Collecting periodic progress reports of implementation of the Subprojects from the PFIs and
forwarding the consolidated reports to the IDA.

x. Preparing and posting all transaction vouchers as per the procedures given in OM.

xi. Arranging workshops, seminars and training programs on different aspects of the project.

xii. Monitoring environmental and social safeguards compliance of the investment sponsor in line with
Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures (ESPP) of IPFF II Project.

xiii. Ensuring PFIs’ compliance with the Project’s safeguards and fiduciary framework.

xiv. Procuring goods and services as per procurement plan of IPFF II following Project Procurement
Strategy for Development (PPSD) of IPFF II Project.

xv. Performing other tasks and functions as are necessary to achieve the objective of the Project.

--- Page 12 ---
4.4 Organogram:
ORGANOGRAM OF IPFF II PROJECT CELL
PROJECT
DIRECTOR
DEPUTY PROJECT
DIRECTOR
PROJECT
MANAGER-1
DEPUTY PROJECT
MANAGER-1
ASSISTANT
PROJECT
MANAGER-1
DEPUTY PROJECT
MANAGER-2
ASSISTANT
PROJECT
MANAGER-2
PROJECT
MANAGER-2
DEPUTY PROJECT
MANAGER-3
ASSISTANT
PROJECT
MANAGER-3
PROJECT
MANAGER-4
DEPUTY PROJECT
MANAGER-5
ASSISTANT
PROJECT
MANAGER -5
PROJECT
MANAGER-3
DEPUTY PROJECT
MANAGER-4
ASSISTANT
PROJECT
MANAGER-4


4.5 Roles and Responsibilities of BIFFL and PPPA:
i. BIFFL and the PPPA will maintain organizational arrangements overseen by the respective heads
of the organizations to absorb TA successfully which will include monitoring and evaluation of
internal performance and results that will feed into the overall project Monitoring and Evaluation
(M&E) structure.

ii. Managing the steps in relevant consultancy services as per the approved procurement plan of IPFF
II, as shared by BB PIU.

iii. Provide monitoring reports to the BB PIU and the IDA in an agreed format and periodicity.

iv. Maintain financial accounts so as to ensure smooth financial reviews/audits of their TA allocations
as part of the overall Financial Management (FM) of the project.

v. Also embed appropriate Environmental and Social (E & S) considerations into their project related
activities, in line with the overall project E & S design.

--- Page 13 ---
5. Selection of PFIs

For being a PFI of IPFF II, private sector scheduled commercial banks (including foreign banks duly
licensed in Bangladesh) and non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs) operating in Bangladesh can apply.
IPFF II Project Cell will have the responsibility for selecting and enlisting banks and NBFIs as the PFIs
subject to their compliance with the eligibility criteria as mentioned in the Annexure 1.

MFAs (format available in https://www.bb.org.bd) will be signed between IPFF II Project Cell and the
selected financial institutions that meet the eligibility criteria. The PFIs, thereafter, need to maintain the
required standard level of operations, to be reviewed annually during IPFF II tenure. IPFF II Project Cell
may delist any PFI failing to comply with the eligibility criteria or breaching any clause in the MFA.
IPFF II Project Cell will share eligibility review summary with IDA for concurrence before signing
MFA.

The two state-owned development finance institutions (DFIs), BIFFL and Infrastructure Development
Company Limited (IDCOL), which are licensed as NBFIs, will also be eligible to participate as PFIs.
Separate MFA will be signed between IPFF II Project Cell and the two DFIs.

Once MFA is signed, the PFIs can start submitting the loan applications and proposals to IPFF II Project
Cell for availing the fund.

6. Responsibilities of PFIs

The PFIs will undertake credit/investment risks of the infrastructure projects and be responsible for the
detailed assessments of the projects’ soundness, financial and economic feasibility, and ESRM aspects.
The PFIs will also monitor implementation of the financed infrastructure projects and will maintain
accounts and records which will allow smooth review/monitoring and assessment of the individual
projects and the entire infrastructure project portfolio of IPFF II. The details are as follows:

i. Financing facility shall be provided for the sectors mentioned in Section Seven (7) of this manual.

ii. Intending private entrepreneur/investment sponsor of a Subproject can approach any selected PFIs
for availing Facility Loan.

iii. Respective PFIs will conduct due diligence on the Subproject proposed by the Sponsor.

iv. PFIs will be responsible for reviewing individual Subproject for eligibility under the facility against
eligibility criteria, including the List of Excluded Activities (Exclusion List) as mentioned in
Annexure 2 and BB ESRM guidelines list issued by Sustainable Finance Department (SFD) of BB;

v. ESRM screening, identification of risks and impact process as conducted by the Sponsor, and
performance monitoring of the respective Subproject will be conducted as per the procedure
described in the IPFF II E & S Policy and Procedures prepared and disclosed by BB. The PFIs will
keep track, in collaboration with the respective Sponsor, of the Subproject’s ESRM compliance
issues.

--- Page 14 ---
vi. PFIs shall be permitted to finance Subprojects associated with high risk activities listed in the List
of Environmentally and Socially Sensitive Activities as mentioned in Annexure 3 provided IDA
and IPFF II Project Cell are of the view that they have sufficient capacity to manage these risks.

vii. After necessary approval at their end, PFIs will send the loan application (Annexure 4) along with
document checklist (Annexure 5) and related documents (Annexure 6 & 7) to IPFF II Project Cell.

viii. Syndication amongst the PFIs and non-PFIs will be permitted. However, IPFF II Facility will be
provided to PFIs only. The lead PFI will be the focal point for operation of the financing facility
and its repayment to BB. All the PFIs will be responsible for credit administration and recovery
from the Sponsors.

ix. Before financial closure, the PFIs will have to arrange financial/credit syndication with other PFIs
and non-PFI partners in the market. Quality of the PFIs’ risk management process will have an
impact on their selection of non-PFI syndication partners.

x. PFIs must ensure that standard commercial practices of the Subproject acceptable to the IDA and
BB, have been followed by the Sponsor in procuring the goods, services or works.

xi. PFIs must ensure proper utilization of the fund for the intended purpose.

xii. PFIs will coordinate with BB and IDA in off-site and on-site quality check of such financing.

xiii. PFIs will submit reports (as per Annexure 8) on disbursement of IPFF II facility quarterly and
utilization of fund to IPFF II Project Cell as required.

xiv. PFIs may seek necessary guidance from IPFF II Project Cell for capacity building regarding proper
implementation of Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) and appraisal of
Subproject.

xv. PFIs must ensure compliance with all regulatory and supervisory requirements of BB.

xvi. PFIs will co-invest (either alone or by syndication) assuming all credit risk and shall exercise its
rights in relation to each Investment Project in such manner as to (a) protect the interests of BB, the
GoB, the IDA, and of the PFI; (b) comply with its obligations under the MFA; and (c) achieve the
purposes of the credit as per terms mentioned in OM.

xvii. PFIs will not be associated with corrupt and unethical business activities or practices inconsistent
with the Investment Project pursuant to the OM.

xviii. After receiving approval to participate in the Facility, the PFIs must continue to satisfy the
eligibility criteria as per MFA.

--- Page 15 ---
xix. If the PFI is not in compliance with any of the eligibility criteria, IPFF II Project Cell will promptly
notify the PFI regarding the specific eligibility criteria which the PFI is not in compliance and seek
appropriate response from the PFI to remedy the violation within a stated agreed upon time period.

xx. If the PFI fails to maintain its eligibility status under the Facility or fails to repay the outstanding
facility loan by a specific date with up to date interest, the IPFF II Project Cell with intimation to
IDA, will have the right to suspend all infrastructure financing amortizations under the facility and
recover the outstanding facility loan with up to date interest by debiting current account (local
currency) and/or foreign currency (FC) clearing Account of the PFI with BB.

xxi. IPFF II may re-establish the eligibility status of the PFI upon demonstrated compliance by the PFI
that the specific eligibility violations have been removed, mitigated or no longer exists.

xxii. PFI will ensure that, within three days of occurrence, Sponsors notify the PFI, and the PFI in turn,
notifies IPFF II Project Cell, of any social, labor, health and safety, security or environmental
incident, accident or circumstance having, or which could reasonably be expected to have, any
material impact on compliance of the Subproject with the agreed Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP).

xxiii. PFI will follow all the instructions issued/given by IPFF II Project Cell regarding investment
facilities.

7. Eligible Sectors for IPFF II Financing

Long-Term Infrastructure Financing facility will be extended through the PFIs against government
approved/endorsed (by appropriate authority/licensed by competent authority in applicable case)
infrastructure projects in eligible sectors mentioned as follows:
Power generation, transmission, distribution, renewable energy and services;
ii.
Port development (sea, river and land) including inland container terminals, inland container
depot and other services;
iii.
Environmental, industrial and solid waste management projects;
iv.
Highways and expressways including mass-transit, bridges, tunnels, flyovers, interchanges, city
roads, bus terminals, commercial car parking, etc;
Airports, terminals and related aviation facilities;
vi.
Water supply and distribution, sewerage and drainage;
vii.
Industrial estates, economic zones, eco parks, theme parks and parks development;
viii.
Social sector including infrastructure in health and education;
ix.
Information and communication technology (ICT, including wi-max, internet backbone and e-
learning facilities);

--- Page 16 ---
10

8. Requirements of Investment Sponsor

The Sponsors willing to avail the IPFF II Fund through the PFIs under this Facility shall follow the
following procedures:
i. The Sponsor shall have received a Letter of Intent (LoI) legally and systematically from the
concerned government agency for the government-sponsored infrastructure investment project
Or
The Sponsor shall have prepared a proposal for a private infrastructure project of a type identified
by the government as eligible for financing under the facility.
ii. The Sponsors shall have the capability in terms of financial, management and industry working to
carry out the Subproject.
iii. The Sponsor shall provide evidence of ability to inject/provide required equity contribution to the
development of the proposed investment project.
iv. The Sponsor shall have received the credit approval from the PFIs for the investment project.
v. The Sponsor shall have obtained appropriate environmental clearance from the Department of
Environment (DoE) and other clearance from the related government agencies. If the clearance is
under process of examination/issuance, the Sponsor must submit the clearance to the PFI before
the fund disbursement.
vi. The Sponsor shall carry out the process of identification of E & S risks and impacts of Subproject,
as well as prepare required management plans, ensure adequate stakeholder engagement process
and disclosure, conduct monitoring and reporting (to BB and other stakeholders, as needed), on
the implementation of E & S risk management measures, in accordance with the requirements of
the World Bank Performance Standards. The Sponsor will follow the process described in IPFF II
E & S Policy and Procedures.
vii. The Sponsor shall abide by all the prevailing rules and regulation of GoB, IDA and BB.


9. Terms and Conditions for Sanctioning Infrastructure Financing

IPFF II Financing Facility will be provided to PFIs as the partial debt financing to the
infrastructure investment proposal. The Sponsor will typically bring 25 (Twenty Five) percent or
more of the total Subproject cost as equity.
ii.
IPFF II Project will finance no more than 50 (Fifty) percent of the total project cost of a
Subproject and maximum financing to a single infrastructure Subproject shall not exceed 20
(Twenty) percent of the total IDA allocation under long-term infrastructure financing/on-lending
component.
iii.
The rest of the total financing will require to be financed by the PFI alone or, in syndication, with
other financial institutions. The PFIs and other financial institution will provide their shares of
the financing to the Subproject in local currency or foreign currency or both.

--- Page 17 ---
11

iv.
Financing facility will be extended either in USD or in BDT, or in a combination of both USD
and BDT, at fixed or variable rates, depending on request by the PFIs and business need of the
Subproject.
Facility Loan in USD financing will be provided only to the PFIs who are authorized by BB to
deal in foreign exchange. PFIs will have to obtain permission/approval from Foreign Exchange
Policy Department (FEPD) of BB for such financing, if necessary.
vi.
The interest rate of facility loans for PFIs shall be as follows:
Currency
Fixed
Variable
USD
USD 10-year swap rate + 50 Basis
Point (bp)
USD 12-month Libor
(Potentially
also
USD
6-month
Libor + 30 bp and USD 3-month
Libor + 60 bp)
BDT
GoB T-Bill 364-day yield + 100 bp
GoB T-Bill 364-day yield
vii.
The interest rate on the Facility Loans shall be standardized across PFIs. The grace period and
amortization schedule shall match that of infrastructure financing extended by PFIs, subject to
the maximum terms indicated below. It may be noted that the grace period offered to the Sponsor
by a PFI can be longer but cannot be shorter than the grace period the PFI receives from IPFF II.
Maturity of loans to the PFIs will aim to mirror maturity of financing from the PFIs to project
Sponsors. Financing for the private sector Sponsors may be made for working capital and
investment purposes. The list of applicable reference interest rates of facility loans will be
continuously maintained by IPFF II Project Cell.
viii.
Facility Loans to the PFIs will have at least 8 (Eight) years (or 96 months) of maturity and can be
provided up to 20 (Twenty) years (or 240 months), including grace period of maximum 3 (Three)
years. Grace period may be extended in exceptional cases, subject to concurrence of IDA.
ix.
Facility Loans shall be disbursed to PFIs against Infrastructure Financing made or to be made by
PFIs to finance Subprojects and shall be completed before the closing date of the IPFF II Project.
PFIs shall disburse Infrastructure Financing to Sponsors immediately after getting funds from
IPFF II Project.
xi.
The interest rate on facility loans to the investment Sponsor shall be determined by the respective
PFI in accordance with its usual lending practices. The cost of financing by PFIs to investment
sponsor will include, at a minimum, the cost of the project fund plus an on-lending margin
reflecting: (i) the PFI’s administrative costs and (ii) a credit risk margin.
xii.
When presenting the infrastructure financing proposal (submitted by the PFI & reviewed by the
technical advisor/consultant) to the IDA for approval, IPFF II Project Cell will include:
a. a description of the Investment Sponsor and an appraisal of the Investment Project,
including a description of the expenditures proposed to be financed out of the proceeds of
the credit; Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and
Social Audit (ESA), as applicable, and any environmental and social risk management

--- Page 18 ---
12

plans, such as Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) that might have been prepared by sponsor
by that time as well as Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) that will list actions
to be taken by sponsor to ensure compliance with Bangladesh regulations and World Bank
Performance Standards.
b. the proposed terms and conditions of the Infrastructure Financing, including the schedule
of amortization of the Infrastructure Financing; and such other information as the IDA
shall reasonably request.
xiii.
All Infrastructure Financing by a PFI shall be subject to prior concurrence by the IDA. Selection
of Subprojects shall be based on the principles of value for money, economy, integrity, fit-for-
purpose, efficiency, transparency, fairness, and innovativeness.
xiv.
The Infrastructure Financing shall be made on terms whereby the PFI shall obtain, by written
contract with the Investment Sponsor or by other appropriate legal means, rights adequate to
protect the interests of the GoB, the IDA and the PFI, including right to
a) require the investment sponsor to (i) carry out and operate the Investment Project with due
diligence and efficiency, in accordance with the provisions of Anti-Corruption Guidelines,
and in accordance with sound technical, financial, managerial, social and environmental
standards and practices acceptable to the IDA; (ii) maintain adequate records and (iii)
provide, promptly as needed, the resources and labor required for carrying out the
Investment Project.
b) require that: (i) the goods and services to be financed out of the proceeds of the credit shall
be procured in accordance with established commercial practices and procedures
satisfactory to the BB and IDA; and (ii) such goods and services shall be used exclusively
in the carrying out of the Investment Project;
c) require the Investment Sponsor to carry out the ESMPs and ESMS in a manner
satisfactory to the PFI, IPFF II Project Cell, GoB and the IDA
d) require the Sponsor to annually carry out the audit of the Investment Project under terms
of reference satisfactory to the PFI;
e) inspect, by the PFI itself or jointly with representatives of the BB/IDA if the BB/IDA shall
so request, such goods and the sites, works, plants and construction included in the
Investment Project, the operation thereof, and any relevant records and documents;
f) require that: (i) the Investment Sponsor shall take out and maintain with responsible
insurers such insurance, against such risks and in such amounts, as shall be consistent with
sound business practice; and (ii) without any limitation upon the foregoing, such insurance
shall cover hazards incident to the acquisition, transportation and delivery of goods
financed out of the proceeds of the Credit to the place of use or installation, any indemnity
there under to be made payable in a currency freely usable by the Investment Sponsor to
replace or repair such goods.
g) obtain all such information as the GoB, BB, IDA or the PFI shall reasonably request
relating to the foregoing and to the administration, operation and financial condition of the
Sponsor and to the benefits to be derived from the Investment Project; and

--- Page 19 ---
13

h) suspend or terminate the right of the Sponsor to the use of the proceeds of the Credit upon
failure by such Sponsor to perform its obligations under its contract with the PFI
xv.
The PFI shall enter into an Infrastructure Financing Agreement with each Sponsor to finance the
implementation of Investment Projects/Subprojects.

10. Operational Procedure for Availing Facility Loan

The Sponsors, after being selected to undertake a government approved/endorsed (by
appropriate authority/licensed (by competent authority in applicable case) infrastructure
projects in eligible sectors mentioned in Section Seven (7) of this OM, will approach to a PFI.
ii.
The Sponsor will request PFIs for financing the subproject along with a project profile
completed with financial appraisal and technical studies, documents and papers required by the
PFI, IPFF II Project Cell and IDA. Investment Projects will also be required to submit their
procurement plan along with the proposal. A checklist (not exhaustive) for the documents
required by IPFF II Project Cell and the IDA is given in Annexure 5.
iii.
The PFI, having received the proposal, if agreeable to invest in the Subproject, conducts due
diligence to assess the credit worthiness of the investment sponsors and viability, credit risks
and environmental and social risks of the investment project.
iv.
A PFI intending to finance a Subproject may approach IPFF II Project Cell with request for
getting facility from IPFF II.
IPFF II Project Cell will do the initial scrutiny as per the checklist and will forward the
proposal to the Technical Advisors/Consultants.
vi.
The Technical Advisors, Environment & Social Consultants/Technical Committee and other
consultants (if any) appointed by IPFF II Project Cell will review the proposed investment
project and provide their advice/recommendation.
vii.
IPFF II Project Cell will not take commercial/credit decisions when reviewing the proposals;
rather IPFF II Project Cell, with support from Technical Consultants and E & S qualified
consultants as needed, reviews whether the investment projects to be financed meet predefined
criteria e.g., acceptable procurement, sufficient equity participation, Subprojects conform with
E & S applicable requirements including adequate E & S impact assessment and management
plans prepared or under preparation etc.
viii.
Based on the assessment and recommendation, if the Subproject is found to adhere to IPFF II
objectives, OM, and GoB policies, IPFF II Project Cell will request IDA to accord concurrence
for funding the Subproject.
ix.
IDA will review the proposal and, if considers acceptable, provides its concurrence for funding
the Subproject. IDA review will be based on the following
 Review of technical specifications of investment project
 Review of adequacy of procurement process and compliance of procurement process with
commercial practices acceptable to the IDA

--- Page 20 ---
14

 Review of compliance of investment project to environmental and social management
policy and procedure
If required, IPFF II Project Cell/PFIs will send the Subproject proposal to FEPD of BB for
their concurrence/permission for financing in USD from IPFF II Project Cell.
xi.
Upon receiving concurrence for financing the Subproject proposal from IDA, facility loans will
be extended against that Subproject through the PFIs.
xii.
Repayment by PFIs will be made in BDT and/or USD as per Facility Access Agreement
(FAA). In case of USD financing, repayment will have to be made in USD and for BDT
financing the repayment will have to be made in BDT.
xiii.
Repayment of the loan will start after a certain grace period and to be repaid on quarterly/half
yearly instalments. The grace period will be determined by the PFIs based on the projected
timing of the cash inflows of Subproject. However, the grace period will not be more than 3
(three) years.
xiv.
An indicative amortization schedule for the repayment will be prepared by the PFIs in
consultation with IPFF II Project Cell during the signing of FAA. However, final amortization
schedule will have to be submitted to IPFF II Project Cell in due course. In case of multiple
instalments of disbursements, this amortization schedule may be revised at the closing of the
financing to reflect the actual disbursement.
xv.
Eligible investment projects are considered for financing by IPFF II Project Cell on a first-
come-first-served basis. Applications incomplete in any respect will fall back in the queue and
will be overtaken by other complete applications in the disbursement process.
xvi.
Other terms and conditions related to facility loans described in OM are also applicable for
Subproject financing.
The above implementation arrangement is shown in a diagram in Annexure 9.

11. Repayment Mechanism

As per amortization schedule, each PFI is required to pay the full amount by Cheque/Demand
Draft/Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) or any other means instructed by IPFF II Project Cell on
due date.
ii.
IPFF II Project Cell and PFI will monitor the total repayment system.
iii.
Value date for repayment received is the date (before noon) the cheque or demand draft is handed
over to IPFF II Project Cell. In case of EFT, the date provided by the debit authority will be the
value date.
iv.
At the close of repayment day, if there are any non-payments, the PFI will contact and
communicate with IPFF II Project Cell that the repayment has been missed out. IPFF II Project
Cell may also contact and remind them.
Late payments are subject to penalties at the prevailing interest rate applicable for the Subproject.
vi.
If the repayment date happens to be a holiday, the repayment will then be payable on the next
working day without penalties.

--- Page 21 ---
15

vii.
Each PFI should maintain a database regarding their repayment due dates and monitor properly.
viii.
Pre-payments are allowed without penal interest. But commitment charge @ ½ (Half) of 1.00%
(One Percent) is payable for premature adjustment of the entire amount of loan outstanding.
ix.
In case of partial pre-payment, repayment schedules are redrawn, and the new repayment
schedule is entered into the system.

12. Restructuring of Facility Loan

Restructuring of facility extended to PFIs may be allowed in very exceptional cases, subject to
concurrence of IDA.


13. Master Facility Agreement

Private Sector Scheduled Commercial Banks and NBFIs that meet the eligibility criteria for enlistment
and continuity as PFI will be enlisted with the IPFF II as PFIs. A PFI, to be eligible for IPFF II credits,
shall enter into a MFA with BB, the terms and conditions of which, inter alia, provide that:
The PFI shall conduct its operations and affairs in accordance with sound financial standards and
accounting and auditing practices, compliance with BB prudential norms as minimum capital
adequacy ratio, maximum foreign currency exposure limits, positive return on equity in the last
three years; adequate organization, management, staff and other resources, application of
appropriate procedures for appraisal, supervision, and monitoring (including procurement, E & S
risk management), satisfactory to the IDA.
ii.
The PFI shall establish and maintain procedures and operational policies, satisfactory to BB, for
the appraisal, supervision and monitoring of infrastructure financing.
iii.
The PFI shall ensure that infrastructure financing will be made in accordance with the procedures
and on the terms and conditions set forth in the OM of IPFF II Project.
iv.
The PFI shall exercise its rights in relation to each Subproject in such manner as to: (i) protect the
interests of BB, the GoB, IDA, and the PFI; (ii) comply with its obligations under the MFA; and
(iii) achieve the purpose of the Credit.
The PFI shall duly perform all its obligations under the MFA, including those referred to in
Section 1. H, of Schedule 2 of Financing Agreement of IPFF II Project signed between GoB and
IDA (Environmental and Social (E & S) Risk Management). Except as the BB, GoB and IDA
shall otherwise agree, the PFI shall not take or concur in any action which would have the effect
of assigning, amending, abrogating or waiving the MFA or any provision thereof.
vi.
The PFI shall, at the request of BB, exchange views with BB with regard to the performance of its
obligations under the MFA and other matters relating to the purposes of the Credit.
vii.
The PFI shall promptly inform the GoB, BB and IDA of any condition which interferes or
threatens to interfere with the accomplishment of the purposes of the Credit or the performance by
the PFI of its obligations under the MFA.

--- Page 22 ---
16

viii.
The PFI shall maintain procedures and records adequate to monitor and record the progress of
each Subproject (including its cost and the benefits to be derived from it) and to reflect in
accordance with consistently maintained sound accounting and auditing practices the operations
and financial condition of the PFI.
ix.
The PFI shall enter into FAA with BB for receiving Facility Loans.
The PFI shall carry out the Project in accordance with the provision of the Anti-Corruption
Guidelines.
xi.
Facility Loans shall be disbursed to PFIs against Infrastructure Financing made or to be made by
PFIs to finance Subprojects and shall be completed before the closing date of the IPFF II Project.
xii.
BB shall make available Facility Loans in accordance with; inter alia, the provisions of the FAA.
xiii.
The terms and conditions of Facility Loans shall be as set out in this OM and Part C of Schedule 4
of Financing Agreement of IPFF II Project signed between GoB and IDA.
xiv.
The right of PFIs to use the proceeds of Facility Loans shall be suspended or terminated upon the
suspension or termination of the related Infrastructure Financing for the relevant Subproject.
xv.
The PFIs to ensure their due diligence with respect to ESRM, including, inter alia:
internalizing Applicable E & S Requirements, as well as due diligence and monitoring
processes for IPFF II and making them an integral part of the PFI’s institutional ESMS;
ensuring adequate implementation of the ESMS at the PFI’s level to enable design,
construction, and operation of Subprojects in compliance with relevant GoB’s regulations
and requirements and the IDA’s applicable E & S Requirements, including, inter-alia:
developing and maintaining adequate organizational structure, budget, and capacity for
identifying, managing, monitoring, and reporting on risks and impacts of Subprojects;
ensuring fulfilment by Investment Sponsors of their respective obligations with regard to
environmental and social due diligence and monitoring for Subprojects, including formal
clearances and timely disclosure of environmental and social instruments for Subprojects
(such as ESIAs, ESMPs, ESAPs are completed in accordance with the ESMS and
applicable GoB’s regulations and requirements;
inclusion of adequate provisions in Subproject contract documentation between PFIs and
Sponsors to ensure compliance of Subprojects with Applicable E & S Requirements;
Disclosure of elements of the PFIs’ ESMS and, after review by BB, summaries of the
ESIA that is required for any Subproject considered high risk in accordance with the
ESMS; and
Providing BB, GoB and IDA with annual reporting of environmental and social
performance of all Subprojects in accordance with any environmental or social
commitments included in ESMPs and ESAPs that have been incorporated in investment
contracts with Sponsors.

--- Page 23 ---
17

14. Facility Access Agreement

IPFF II Project Cell of BB shall enter into a FAA with each PFI for each Facility Loan. Except as
the GoB, BB and the IDA shall otherwise agree, the terms and conditions of the FAA shall, inter
alia, provide that:
ii.
The Facility Loan shall be utilized by the PFI to provide Infrastructure Financing for the purpose
of assisting with the financing of a Subproject.
iii.
The PFI shall, unless the GoB, BB and the IDA shall otherwise agree, ensure that Infrastructure
Financing will be made in accordance with procedures and on the terms and conditions set forth
in this OM.
iv.
In respect of the Facility Loan, the PFI shall comply with all its relevant obligations set out in the
MFA.
The PFI shall duly perform all its obligations under the FAA including those referred to in
Section 1. H, of Schedule 2 of Financing Agreement of IPFF II Project signed between GoB and
IDA (Environmental and Social (E & S) Risk Management). Except as BB, GoB and IDA shall
otherwise agree, the PFI shall not take or concur in any action which would have the effect of
assigning, amending, abrogating or waiving the FAA or any provision thereof.
vi.
The PFI shall, at the request of BB, exchange views with BB with regard to the performance of its
obligations under the FAA and other matters relating to the purposes of the Credit.
vii.
The PFI shall promptly inform BB, the GoB and the IDA of any condition which interferes or
threatens to interfere with the accomplishment of the purposes of the Credit or the performance by
the PFI of its obligations under the FAA.
viii.
The PFI shall maintain procedures and records adequate to monitor and record the progress of
each Subproject (including its cost and the benefits to be derived from it) and to reflect in
accordance with consistently maintained sound accounting practices the operations and financial
condition of the PFI.
ix.
The PFI shall annually carry out the audit of the Facility Loan under terms of reference
satisfactory to the BB.
The Facility Loan shall be disbursed to the PFI against Infrastructure Financing made or to be
made by the PFI to help with the financing of a Subproject.
xi.
The terms and conditions of the Facility Loan shall be as set out in this OM.
xii.
The right of the PFI to use the proceeds of the Facility shall be suspended or terminated upon the
suspension or termination of the related Infrastructure Financing for the relevant Subproject.

Besides, the following clauses shall also include in the FAA under the section of Special Conditions:
I. The IDA and IPFF II Project Cell requires that the PFI, as well as the sponsor, suppliers, contractors
and their agents (whether declared or not), personnel, sub-contractors, sub-consultants, service
providers and suppliers, under the World Bank financed contracts, observe the highest standard of
ethics during the procurement and execution of such contracts. In pursuit of this policy, the World Bank
(a) defines, for the purpose of this provision, the terms set forth below as follows:

--- Page 24 ---
18

(i) “corrupt practice” is the offering, giving, receiving or soliciting, directly or indirectly, of anything
of value to influence improperly the actions of another party;
(ii) “fraudulent practice” is any act or omission, including a misrepresentation, that knowingly or
recklessly misleads, or attempts to mislead, a party to obtain a financial or other benefit or to
avoid an obligation;
(iii)“collusive practice” is an arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve an
improper purpose, including to influence improperly the actions of another party;
(iv) “coercive practice” is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or
indirectly, any party or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions of a party;
(v) “obstructive practice” is (aa) deliberately destroying, falsifying, altering or concealing of
evidence material to the investigation or making false statements to investigators in order to
materially impede a Bank investigation into allegations of a corrupt, fraudulent, coercive or
collusive practice; and /or threatening, harassing or intimidating any party to prevent it from
disclosing its knowledge of matters relevant to the investigation or from pursuing the
investigation, or (bb) acts intended to materially impede the exercise of the World Bank’s
inspection and audit rights.
(b) The IDA and IPFF II Project Cell will reject a proposal for award if it determines that the investor
has, directly or through an agent, engaged in corrupt, fraudulent, collusive, coercive or obstructive
practices in competing for the contract in question;

(c) The IDA and IPFF II Project Cell will cancel the portion of the loan allocated to a contract if it
determines at any time that the sponsors, as beneficiary of the facility engaged in corrupt, fraudulent,
collusive, or coercive practices during the procurement or the execution of the contract, the World
Bank will take appropriate action to remedy the situation;

(d) The IDA will sanction a firm or an individual, at any time, in accordance with prevailing World
Bank’s sanction procedure, including by publicly declaring such firm or individual ineligible, either
indefinitely or for a stated period of time: (i) to be awarded a World Bank financed contract; and (ii) to
be nominated sub-contractor, consultant, manufacturer or supplier, or service provider of an otherwise
eligible firm being awarded a World Bank financed contract.

II. The PFI and the sponsor shall permit the IDA and IPFF II Project Cell to inspect sponsors accounts
and records pertaining to debt financing of the plant and to have them audited by auditors appointed by
the World Bank, if so required by the World Bank


15. Infrastructure Financing Agreement

The PFI shall enter into an Infrastructure Financing Agreement with each Sponsor to finance the
implementation of Investment Projects/Subprojects, under specific terms and conditions corresponding to
each type of debt instrument or guarantees, or equity and/or any other financing instrument appropriately
developed, assessed and approved; all in accordance with criteria, requirements, and procedures set out in
the FAA and OM.

--- Page 25 ---
19

16. Procurement

All goods, works, non-consulting services, and consulting services required for activities under TA of the
IPFF II Project shall be procured in accordance with the requirements set forth or referred to in the World
Bank’s ‘Procurement Regulations for Borrowers under Investment Project Financing’, dated July 1, 2016
(Procurement Regulations) and the provisions of the Procurement Plan of IPFF II Project. Whereas
procurement required for activities related to Subprojects to be funded under IPFF II shall be subject to
acceptable commercial practices in accordance with this OM.

16.1 Procurement under Long-Term Infrastructure Financing:

In procuring goods, works and services, public sector entities follow Public Procurement Act (PPA) 2006
and Public Procurement Rules (PPR) 2008. In private sector, there is no such standard guideline that is to
be followed in general. Private Sponsors generally procure required items (goods, works, services etc.)
through collecting offers/bids based on their necessity. However, in case of IPFF II funding private sector
sponsors are expected to have their own procurement policy that is in compliance with the standard
commercial practice in the industry. In IPFF II Project a wide variety of sectors are considered for
funding under IPFF II facility loan. Therefore, the items required to be procured and the nature of
procurement in those sectors will be varied widely. Hence, it would not possible to provide a generalized
guideline of standard commercial practices for all the eligible sectors of IPFF II Project. However, a
sample standard commercial practice for the procurement of equipment is given below as an example:


Figure: procurement Process of the Potential Subprojects to be funded under IPFF II Project.

Needs
Identification
• Identify equipment required for the project
• Collect information on equipment from similar project
• Recognize the proven equipment and estimate cost
• Create requisition and obtain approval
Request for
Quotation
• Search available suppliers of the equipment
• Prepare request for quotation with details on quality, quantity and delivery time
• Send request for quotation to prospective suppliers
• Form procurement committee
Quotations
Evaluation
• Receive quotations from suppliers
• Examine and evaluate the quotations through the procurement committee
• Prepare a comparative analysis of supplier’s offers and recommend the best
• Receive approval and prepare the purchase order
Contract
Management
• Send purchase order to supplier
• Suppliers confirm purchase order in writing
• Receive the procured object
• Maintain record of procurement

--- Page 26 ---
20

i. Needs Identification: The respective department of an investment sponsor requiring something/a
particular object will identify the requirement of it and a purchase requisition is placed accordingly to
the head of the respective department. The department in need of the items has to undertake an initial
search for availability of the goods and make a price estimate that will be reflected in the standard
requisition form. The purchase requisition should incorporate specifications and other information of
the required goods along with the estimated price, as collected from the technical experts. After all
necessary judgment, the head of the department has to approve the requisition and will forward it to the
purchase department within a stipulated time. Before, submitting the requisition, estimated cost of the
goods should be checked against the available budget. Afterwards, the purchase department will
conduct purchase activities based on purchase requisition submitted by the concerned department. The
department will be liable for identifying the items required and preparing the requisition. Whereas, the
purchase department will be responsible for preparing request for quotation, placing purchase order,
opening of Letter of Credit (L/C), release of goods, customs clearance and conducting other
procurement aspects of the company. Besides, purchase department has to keep a master list of the
approved suppliers, profile of the suppliers, purchase requisition, material receipt reports and quality
check records etc.

ii. Preparation of Request for Quotation and Distribution among Suppliers: After receiving a
requisition, the purchase department would determine the procedure and available sources of
procurement. The department will have to perform an initial search for existing stocks within the
company, call off from existing supply agreements or order from other sources on approval. Based on
the outcomes/performance, a list of suppliers needs to be developed to whom the request for quotation
of the goods will be provided.

Sources of Suppliers


The purchase department will prepare a request for quotation for the items to be procured that will
include among other things technical specification, required quantities, delivery schedule and place,
payment procedures etc. The request for quotation has to distribute among the selected suppliers by letter,
Master list of Approved suppliers
Suppliers of the Proven market players
in the Industry
Expert Reviews as Provided in Internet
Suppliers Recommended by the in-
house Purchase Department
Suppliers Recommended by Technical
Consultant of the Project if hired

--- Page 27 ---
21

fax or electronic mail, indicating the last date by which the quotations will be submitted. At this stage the
purchase department will also form a procurement committee incorporating members from different
departments or other/external sources as required for the procurement.

iii. Collection and Evaluation of Quotations: Whenever a company receives responses against the
request for quotation, an assessment of offers has to be conducted for identifying the best evaluated
quotation/supplier. The evaluation can be performed depending on several criteria such as proximity to
the specification, offered price, delivery time, previous exposure in the field, supplier’s performance
record etc.


Evaluation Criteria


The procurement committee will prepare a comparative analysis statement of the offers and recommend
the most appropriate supplier. However, the final selection of the supplier will be determined subject to
the approval of head of the company. After receiving approval, purchase department starts to negotiate
with the selected supplier on offered price, quality and other different components.

iv. Contract Management: Purchase department is responsible for overall contract management with
assistance of finance department. After settling the issues and mutual consent from both sides, purchase
department would issue a Purchase Order (PO) in favor of the company/best evaluated supplier providing
final price, delivery schedule and place, and standard specification. Thereafter, the supplier would
confirm the order issuing an invoice in favor of the company. Purchase department will be responsible
for collecting all necessary documents against dispatched goods. The quality check of the received goods
also needs to be conducted by the appropriate technical persons. Purchase department will be responsible
for collecting all necessary documents against dispatched goods.




Offered Price
Proximity to Specification
Delivery Time
Reputation in Market
Previous Performance Record

--- Page 28 ---
22

Issues in Contract Management:



After receiving the goods, store department would issue Materials Receipt Report (MRR). The weight
and quantity check of the goods needs to be performed by the store. In case of any damage, loss or
unsuitability, an immediate report has to be sent to the purchase department providing the details.
Purchase department will submit MRR along with other necessary documents to head of finance
department for releasing the payment.

16.2 Procurement under Technical Assistance:

The procurement activities under IPFF II project would mostly concentrate on hiring consultancy
services and procuring some goods including computer hardware and accessories, office equipment, and
stationary under its TA Component. The consultancy service procurement would include hiring few firms
and some individual consultants.

I. Procurement Objectives:

i. Ensure that purchased goods, works, non-consultancy services and consultancy services are fit for
purpose.
ii. Keep implementation delays low through appropriately planned and monitored procurement.
iii. Procure products at competitive market prices.
iv. Ensure that right quantities of required products, conforming to specified quality levels, are
delivered to intended locations in a timely manner.
v. Protect legitimate business interests of suppliers, contractors, and consultants with a view to
creating and maintaining confidence of the market in the purchaser which is necessary in the long-
term interests of the purchaser.

II. Procurement Responsibility:

For procurement responsibility, the PIU will be responsible for all procurements under TA component.
For the consultancy packages necessary for PPPA and BIFFL, IPFF II Project Cell will delegate
Issuance and Confirmation of PO
Confirmed Receipt Document against Dispatched
Goods
Issuance of Material Receipt Report (MRR)
Ensure Records of Goods
Ensure Approval of Record

--- Page 29 ---
23

procurement and contract management responsibility to PPPA and BIFFL. However, all such contracts
shall be signed by PIU and payment will also be made by PIU. PPPA and BIFFL will provide all
necessary technical supports to IPFF II Project Cell through signing Memoranda of Understanding
(MoU). They have to ensure the procurement in compliance with applicable regulations and guidelines.
For effective procurement management, these two organizations have to carry out the following roles:

i. Maintain organizational arrangements overseen by the heads of the organizations.
ii. Provide monitoring reports in connection with procurement to the PIU and IDA in an agreed
format.
iii. Maintain documentation for audit and other purposes as needed by the PIU and IDA.

In all applicable cases, PPPA and BIFFL will seek necessary concurrence from the appropriate authority
(BB /IDA/FD/Cabinet Committee on Government Purchase (CCGP etc.) through IPFF II Project Cell.
Upon confirmation of receipt of service/goods from PPPA and BIFFL with recommendation to pay bill,
the PD will be responsible for payment from the project account.

III.
Procurement Risks:

The main drivers to the risks are associated to capacity constraint of the agencies and delay in performing
procurement contract management related activities.

IV. Managing Procurement Risks:

In order to minimize the procurement associated risks, the following measures have been agreed upon
with IDA (as referred in the PPSD of IPFF II Project).
PPSD and Procurement Plan: A PPSD has been developed by the IPFF II Project Cell, in
agreement with the IDA, taking into account the volume of items to be procured, prevailing
market conditions, activity level risks etc. The PPSD spells out the appropriate procurement
strategy for this project. PPSD is a live document and it is to be updated at least annually. As an
output of the PPSD exercise, initial Procurement Plan has been prepared. For each contract to
be financed under the project, the different selection methods for procurement, market
approach, contracting arrangement, estimated costs, prior review requirements and time frame
were also agreed between IPFF II Project Cell and IDA in the Procurement Plan;

(ii) Introducing Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) System: STEP is
introduced to prepare and manage procurement plan and procurement transactions under the
project. The procurement plan will be updated semi-annually (or as required) using STEP
system;

(iii) Bid/Proposal Evaluation Committee: All procuring agencies shall ensure that the bid/proposal
evaluation committees are formed in a manner acceptable to the IDA, and IDA’s no objection
shall be required on the formation, as well as alteration in the composition or membership, of

--- Page 30 ---
24

the bid/proposal evaluation committees. Procurement consultant(s) of the project will be
mandatory member(s) of the bid/proposal evaluation committee;

(iv) Electronic Government Procurement (e-GP): Request for Bids (Open-National) contracts under
the project will incrementally use the e-GP system of the country. National e-Government
Procurement (e-GP) portal (i.e. http://eprocure.gov.bd ) of the GoB is developed, owned and
being operated by the Central Procurement Technical Unit (CPTU), IMED of Ministry of
Planning. The e-GP system provides an on-line platform to carry out the procurement activities
by the Public Agencies - Procuring Agencies (PAs) and Procuring Entities (PEs). The e-GP
system is a single web portal from where and through which PAs and PEs will be able to
perform their procurement related activities using a dedicated secured web based dashboard.
The e-GP system is hosted in e-GP Data Center at CPTU, and the e-GP web portal is accessible
by the PAs and PEs through internet for their use. This online platform also helps them ensuring
equal access to the Bidders/Tenderers and also ensuring efficiency, transparency and
accountability in the public procurement process in Bangladesh;

(v) Procurement Focal Person (PFP): BB shall nominate a procurement focal person. The appointed
focal person will take necessary training in procurement, if required. The PFP will help BB in
day-to-day procurement follow-up and preparation of periodic procurement reports;
(vi)
Local Procurement Consultant: BB will hire local procurement consultant. The consultant will
lead and support all procurement related activities that need to be carried out as part of the
preparation and implementation of the Project. The consultant will be a core member of the
BB PIU and work closely with the focal persons of procuring agencies, especially BB PIU
and all members of the PIU team;

(vii)
Other Due-diligence Measures: The following measures will be adopted as part of
procurement and implementation arrangements: (i) all bid evaluation reports will include
verification of recommended bidders’ post-qualification information; (ii) make bidders
generally aware about fraud and corruption issues; (iii) preserve records and all documents
regarding procurement (including correspondences with the potential bidders as well as
complaints/clarification requests etc.), in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement
Regulations and Public Procurement Rules, to facilitate smooth procurement audit or post-
review; and (e) publish contract award information on Central CPTU and BB’s website (and
in United Nations Development Business (UNDB) online for international contracts).

Procurement Plan:

For each contract to be financed under the project, the different procurement methods or consultant
selection methods, the need for pre-qualification, estimated costs, prior review requirements and time
frame were agreed between the implementing agencies and the IDA in the Procurement Plan through

--- Page 31 ---
25

STEP system. All expected major procurements will be announced in the General Procurement Notice
(GPN), published in the World Bank external website and UNDB. The procurement plan will be updated
at least semi-annually (or as required) using STEP system of the World Bank. The procurement Plan,
including its updates, shall include:
A brief description of the activities/contracts;
ii.
The selection methods to be applied;
iii.
Cost estimates;
iv.
Time schedules;
The World Bank’s review requirements; and
vi.
Any other relevant procurement information.


VI. Particular Methods of Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-consultancy Services:

Except as otherwise agreed in the Procurement Plan, goods and non-consulting services may be procured
on the basis of Request for Bids (Open-International) procurement method. As allowed under the World
Bank’s ‘Procurement Regulations’, July 1, 2016, other selection methods, market approach, and contract
arrangement as agreed in the Procurement Plan on a case-by-case basis can also be used. Request for
Bids (Open-National) [i.e. National Competitive Tender (NCT)], if allowed in the procurement plan will
be carried out under the Bank’s Procurement Regulations following procedures for Open Tendering
Method (OTM) of GoB (PPA, 2006) using standard/model bidding documents satisfactory to the Bank.
For the purpose of Request for Bids (Open-National) the following shall apply:
Post bidding negotiations shall not be allowed with the lowest evaluated or any other bidder;
ii.
Bids should be submitted and opened in public in one location immediately after the deadline
for submission;
iii.
Lottery in award of contracts shall not be allowed;
iv.
Bidders’ qualification/experience requirement shall be mandatory;
Bids shall not be invited or rejected on the basis of percentage above or below the estimated
cost.

VI. Methods of Procurement of Consultants’ Services:

The Procurement Plan will specify the selection method, market approach (International/National,
Open/Limited/Direct) and contract modality for each of the selection of consultant following the World
Bank’s “Procurement Regulations – July 1, 2016” or any other method, market approach agreed with the
World Bank through the STEP system of the Bank.

VII. Use of Standard Procurement Documents:

For all procurements under the project, the Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents shall be used. In
case of unavailability of a particular procurement document, the procuring agencies will use Model
Tender Documents (MTD) agreed with IDA.

--- Page 32 ---
26

VIII. Prior Review:

The Procurement Plan shall set forth those contracts which shall be subject to IDA’s prior review. All
other contracts shall be subject to Post Review by the IDA. Initial Procurement plan on prior review
thresholds will be updated annually based on the review of the capacity and performance of the procuring
entities and will be reflected in the updated procurement plan as appropriate. The prior review thresholds
for different types of procurements under the project as per the Procurement Framework are as follows:

Procurement Prior Review Thresholds (USD millions)
Type of
procurement
High risk
Substantial risk
Moderate risk
Low risk
Works
(including turnkey,
supply &
installation of plant
and equipment, and
PPP)
10
15
20
Goods, information
technology and
non-consulting
services
1.5
Consultants:
firms
0.5
Consultants:
individual
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

Notes:
Irrespective of the contract value, the following procurement activities are subject to the World Bank’s
procurement prior review:
 Procurement processes involving contract negotiations as, described in paragraphs 6.34-6.36 of
section VI of the Procurement Regulation for Borrowers;
 Competitive dialogue;
 Sustainable procurement; and
 Best and final offer.


IX. Post Review/Integrated Fiduciary Review:

For compliance with the IDA’s procurement procedures, IDA will carry out sample post review of
contracts that are below the prior review threshold. Procurement post-reviews will be done on annual
basis depending on the number of post-review contracts.

--- Page 33 ---
27


IDA may use a third-party consultant to carry out post reviews. Any such third party shall carryout the
reviews in accordance with the Terms of References (ToRs) provided to it by the IDA. Whether
procurement is subject to prior or post review is determined on the basis of the project and contract-
specific procurement risks. These risks are assessed by the IDA during project preparation. The
requirement for a prior or post review shall be specified in the Procurement Plan.

X. Handling Procurement Complaints:

Complaints related to procurement under the TA component will be handled in accordance with
Procurement Regulations of the World Bank.

Complaints associated with procurement under on-lending components/ to sub-projects will be handled
by the concerned private sponsor.


17. Financial Management
17.1 Accounting Policies and Procedures:
The accounting policies and procedures of IPFF II Project will be governed by the existing Project
Accounting Manual of the MoF. All project-related transactions from all sources (IDA and GoB) will be
accounted for separately on cash basis following double-entry bookkeeping principles.

17.2 Maintenance of Books of Accounts and Records:
BB will consolidate financial information and enter them into appropriate books of accounts/register and
maintain supporting papers. BB and PFIs will preserve all procurement records and documents in
accordance with provisions of the PPA 2006, PPR 2008 and the OM of IPFF II Project as applicable.
These records will be available on request for audit/investigation/review by the Government and IDA.
Furthermore, BB, PPPA, BIFFL and PFIs will retain their respective records of all project-related
transactions for 5 years after completion of IPFF II Project or until the audit objections are resolved
whichever comes later.

17.3 Accounting and Reporting:
i. Interim Un-audited Financial Report (IUFR):
BB will prepare IUFR and submit it to the IDA no later than 45 days after the end of each calendar
quarter. The IUFR will include: (i) sources and uses of funds, (ii) uses of funds by project activity,
(iii) designated account reconciliation statement, and (iv)other statements as advised by IDA.
Reporting of expenditure under long- term infrastructure financing component in the IUFR will be
based on PFIs’ disbursement of loans and other financing instruments (e.g. equity or guarantees) to
project sponsors. As such BB will accumulate information of utilization towards funding private
developers from the PFIs quarterly

--- Page 34 ---
28

ii. Annual Financial Statements:
BB will prepare the project’s annual financial statements after the end of a fiscal year as per the
prescribed format of Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate (FAPAD) or Project Accounting
Manual and furnish to FAPAD. The annual financial statements include (i) Project Financial
Statement; (ii) Designated Account Reconciliation Statement; (iii) Bank Account Information; (iv)
Summary of Withdrawal Application (Special Account Replenishment) (v) Summary GoB
Contribution and other statements as requested.

17.4 Audit and Financial Control System:
Internal Audit: Internal Audit Department of BB may carry out audit of IPFF II Project.
Moreover, independent audit firm may be appointed to conduct internal audit of IPFF II
Project, if necessary. The observations and recommendations of internal audit will be
reviewed and followed up upon receiving the internal audit report.
ii.
External Audit: FAPAD will conduct external audit of IPFF II Project within six months
after the end of a fiscal year. IPFF II Project Cell will keep in touch with FAPAD to resolve
audit observations/objections upon receipt of the external audit report. PD will be responsible
for audit follow-up and for taking remedial actions.
iii.
Project Audit Committee: To ensure that the observations and recommendations from
internal and external audits are reviewed and adequately followed up, a Project Audit
Committee (PAC) will be constituted, if necessary. The PSC of IPFF II Project may decide
on formation and Terms of Reference (ToR) of the PAC.

17.5 Bank Accounts Management:
For receiving and utilizing IDA fund, a Dollar Special Account (DOSA) will be opened with Forex
Reserve & Treasury Management Department (FRTMD) of BB and for receiving and utilizing GoB
counterpart fund, a local currency account will be opened with Accounts and Budgeting Department
(A&BD) of BB. Furthermore, an operating account (non-interest generating) may be opened with a
schedule commercial bank selected by IPFF II Project Cell, if deemed necessary. On the other hand, for
receiving the repayment of Facility Loan made by the PFIs and depositing momentarily, two repayment
accounts (one in USD and the other in BDT) will be opened and maintained with the FRTMD of BB. The
designated PD and in his/her absence an alternative official will be the authorized for operating these
accounts. The operation of DOSA will be governed by the directives of FD. On the other hand, the
operation of TAKA Account and Operating Account will be governed by applicable rules and
procedures. However, policy for transferring the balance with the repayment accounts to government
treasury will be formulated by PSC of IPFF II Project or FD of MoF.
The operating account, DOSA & TAKA account, so maintained for the fund management will be closed
as per rules with the approval of competent authority at the end of IPFF II Project. On the other hand,
repayment accounts will be closed with the approval of competent authority after all Facility Loans are
fully repaid by PFIs and repayments are transferred to Government Treasury.

--- Page 35 ---
29

17.6 Fund Management:
Report based disbursement procedures are applicable for withdrawal of IDA funds. As such for eligible
expenditures to be financed by IDA, IPFF II Project Cell will submit withdrawal application, in
accordance with World Bank’s Disbursement Guidelines, to the World Bank based on the forecast for
two quarters. IPFF II Project Cell will ensure that project funds routed through the Designated Account is
reflected in the GoB accounts as well as in the consolidated FM Report. As for GoB’s share of eligible
expenditure, IPFF II Project Cell will make necessary arrangements for withdrawal of fund from Chief
Accountant’s Office (CAO) of FD subject to necessary budget allocation following prevailing
procedures. IPFF II Project Cell will apprise FD and Office of CAO regarding the use of IDA and GoB
funds complying with the Project Accounting Manual.
The contribution to the Subproject to be made under IPFF II Project (out of IDA and GoB fund) will
solely be used in line with the Project Development Objectives. IPFF II Project Cell will ensure that the
on-lending fund is routed to the approved private investors through eligible PFIs. The TA fund will be
used by IPFF II Project Cell for hiring consultants, procuring goods, arranging training and workshops,
and conducting day to day operations as per Technical Assistance Project Proposal (TAPP). All expenses
including advance for travel and operating expenses will be paid through banking system. Government’s
existing rules and procedures outlined in the Project Accounting Manual with respect to authority and
payment responsibility as well as prevailing delegation of financial powers will be applicable for using
TA fund. However, delegation of financial power will not be applicable during extending any facility to
the PFIs against specific Subproject. Rather the rules and procedures outlined in this manual will be
applicable for disbursement of on-lending fund.

Upon closure of IPFF II Project, IPFF II Project Cell will refund unspent funds, if any, lying with the
DOSA and TAKA Accounts to the IDA and the GoB respectively after documenting all eligible
expenditures. In doing so, IPFF II Project Cell will have to get concurrence/approval of MoF and IDA.

18. Monitoring and Reporting

IPFF II Project Cell will monitor the outcomes from the utilization of fund under the facility periodically
through the quarterly reports submitted by the PFIs. In addition to the off-site supervision, the IPFF II
Project Cell, may conduct surprise onsite inspection of the PFIs and the Subproject to ensure the effective
end-use of the fund. Necessary formats of reports will be given to the PFIs for Subproject report. A
format of the quarterly reports to be submitted by the PFIs to BB is attached in Annexure 8

IPFF II Project Cell will be required to ensure that the PFIs will:
i. Comply with the reporting and monitoring requirements as prescribed by BB/IPFF II Project
Cell/IDA
ii. Verify the status of investment projects supported under the IPFF by on-site inspection, as
required for effective use of resources during and after construction.
iii. Prepare investment loan portfolio management and progress reports covering outstanding loans
under the Credit to be submitted to IPFF II Project Cell and IDA as and when required.

--- Page 36 ---
30

iv. PFIs will submit annual audit reports to IPFF II Project Cell and IDA within four months of the
end of the year.
v. Each PFI will maintain a separate database system with adequate backups regarding IPFF II
facility loans.

19. Environmental and Social Risk Management

Environmental and Social Management System: Environmental and social risk management
approach for IPFF II is described in IPFF II E & S Policy and Procedures that have been prepared
by BB and are expected to evolve over time based on the principle of continuous improvement.
BB will work with PFIs to assist them with establishing sound ESMS, to ensure PFIs meet
minimum eligibility criteria for accessing IPFF II funding and continue to improve their systems
thereafter.

ii.
Stakeholder Engagement and Grievance Redress Mechanisms: Grievance redress
mechanisms are an integral part of stakeholder engagement process. IPFF II Project will have a
multi-level process for addressing grievances from project-affected communities. IPFF II Project
Cell and the PFIs will ensure that information about accessing available grievance redress
mechanisms at IPFF II Project Cell and PFI levels (as part of the PFIs’ ESMS) is made available
by project sponsors as part of the overall stakeholder engagement process. These mechanisms are
complementary to the Subproject-level grievance mechanisms to be established by project
sponsors as part of Performance Standards requirements. Grievance redress mechanism of IPFF II
Project has been prepared and attached as Annexure 10.

iii.
E&S Capacity Building: Following the positive experience of Financial Institutions
Development Project (FIDP) and IPFF, capacity building will also be provided under IPFF II
Project. The Project’s TA component will have allocations for retaining qualified technical,
financial, and E & S risk assessment and management expertise to support the build up of
capacity and skills across the ecosystem, including the Government authorities responsible for
preparation and approval of infrastructure projects, including PPPs; financial institutions involved
in financing the projects; and private sector sponsors investing in the projects. IPFF II Project
Cell, jointly with other public sector agencies, will organize workshops (with inputs/participation
of local and international consultants) on pertinent issues related to infrastructure project finance
and implementation. IPFF II Project Cell will also provide opportunities for training abroad or in-
country to the PFIs. Detailed E&S capacity building plan is incused in IPFF II E&S Policy and
Procedures.

--- Page 37 ---
31

iv. IPFF II Environmental and Social Due Diligence and Supervision Process:

Implementation support, incl.
post-review (WB)
Feedback
and
DoE clearance and
Obtaining ECC
IPFF II E&S Eligibility Criteria
Subproject approval by IPFF II is communicated to the PFI and
Project Sponsor
PFI includes E&S conditions in
subproject documentation with
private sponsor (including
ESAP)
Subproject implementation (monitoring by project sponsors, PFIs, IPFF II Project
Cell with assistance of E & S performance monitoring implementation partner)
Annual renewal of ECC
(project sponsors)
* Note: Low risk rating for IPFF II sub-projects is not allowed per IPFF II E&S Policy
Subproject Proposal Submission to IPFF II (PFI)
Task 1: Initial E&S
Screening of Subproject
(Project sponsor or other agency,
in coordination with PFI and
with support from IPFF II quality
assurance implementation
partner for E&S risk assessment
and management process and
instruments)
Initial E & S screening report review in conjunction with PFI E & S performance
rating and private sponsor eligibility criteria (IPFF II Project Cell)
Task 3: PFI E&S
Performance
Rating
(once involved)
Bangladesh Bank
IPFF II Project Cell
Task 2: Private
Sponsor E&S
Screening
(once involved)
Bangladesh Bank
IPFF II Project Cell

IPFF II’s E&S
Eligibility Criteria
not met
Subproject
Rejected

PFI E&S capacity building
activities (with support of
the FI capacity building
implementation partner(s)
Preparation of ESIA, ESMP, ESAP
(Project sponsor or other agency, in coordination with PFI, where involved)
ToRs to be reviewed by IPFF II and cleared by PFI (for High risk sub-projects)
Disclosure, consultation,
stakeholder engagement
(project sponsor/ other
agency/ government/
PFI/BB)
Final Subproject E & S Risk Rating (High or Medium*) per BB ESRM Guidelines
High Risk Rating
(Subproject)
Medium Risk Rating
(Subproject)
Review and clearance of subproject E&S instruments and ESAP
(IPFF II E&S Technical Committee)
No objection from the World
Bank in high risk situations
defined in IPFF II E&S Policy
Final recommendation from
IPFF II E&S Technical
Committee

--- Page 38 ---
32

APPENDIX
Definitions

1. “Administration Agreement” means an agreement to be entered into between the GoB and BB
meeting the requirements of Section I.C, of Schedule 2 and Part A of Schedule 4 to the Financing
Agreement, as the same may be amended from time to time, and such term includes any schedules to
such Administration Agreement.
2. “Anti-Corruption Guidelines” means the “Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and
Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants”, dated October 15,
2006.
3. “Applicable Environmental and Social Requirements” means the technical requirements applied to
Subprojects and which are comprised of: (i) relevant environmental and social national and local
laws and regulations of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh; (ii) List of Excluded Activities, based
on the Exclusion List (Annexure 2), (iii) List of Environmentally and Socially Sensitive Activities
(Annexure 3), and (iv) the World Bank Performance Standards.
4. “Bangladesh Bank” means the bank called the Bangladesh Bank established by the GoB’s
Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 (President’s Order No. 127 of 1972), including the amendments made
thereto with Bangladesh Bank (Amendment) Act, 2003, for the purpose of carrying out the business
of central banking.
5. “Bangladesh Infrastructure Finance Fund Limited” and “BIFFL” means the GoB’s Bangladesh
Infrastructure Finance Fund Limited, a fund established as a government-owned non-banking
financial institution on March 21, 2011 with the purpose of making investments in infrastructure
projects across different infrastructure sectors.
6. “DoE” means the GoB’s Department of Environment or any successor thereto.
7. “Environmental and Social Management System” and “ESMS” means the systematic process for
identifying, assessing and managing environmental and social risks and impacts associated with
activities under the Project and managing exposure to such risks and impacts by BB and PFIs in a
manner that enables the Subprojects to meet Applicable Environmental and Social Requirements;
which systematic process contains the following core elements: (i) IPFF II Environmental and Social
Policy and Procedures prepared and amended by BB from time to time; (ii) a customized ESMS
prepared and implemented at the PFI’s level; and (iii) Environmental and Social Assessment and
Management Systems implemented by Investment Sponsors in accordance with the relevant
regulations of BB and Applicable Environmental and Social Requirements for IPFF II. Adequate
implementation of the ESMS means that BB, PFIs, and Sponsors develop and maintain adequate
policies, procedures, organizational structure, budget, and capacity for identifying, managing,
monitoring, and reporting on risks and impacts of Subprojects.

8. “ESIA” means the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment to be prepared in accordance with
the provisions of the ESMS and pursuant to the GoB’s requirements and World Bank Performance
Standards. The Sponsors assume the responsibility for carrying out the ESIA for the Subproject for

--- Page 39 ---
33

which financing will be sought from the PFI from the proceeds of the Credit; such ESIA must
include ESMPs as commensurate with the outcomes of the environmental and social risks and
impacts identification process for the Subproject, and an ESAP as needed.
9. “ESMPs” means, collectively, the Environmental and Social Management Plans, prepared and to be
prepared in accordance with the ESMS and pursuant to the requirements of the World Bank
Performance Standards, providing for detailed measures to mitigate adverse environmental and
social risks and impact of Investment Projects/Subprojects.
10. “ESAP” means, collectively, the Environmental and Social Action Plan (or, Action Plan) to be
prepared by Investment Sponsors included in the contract documentation between such Investment
Sponsor and the PFI in relation to a Subproject, which said Action Plan shall include, inter-alia: (i)
description of the necessary actions to implement mitigation measures or corrective actions to be
undertaken; (ii) prioritization of said actions; (iii) timeline for actions’ implementation; (iv)
disclosure to the affected communities; and (v) schedule and mechanism for external reporting on
the Action Plan’s implementation.
11. “Facility” or “Investment Promotion and Financing Facility II” or ‘`IPFF II’’ means the facility to be
created within BB following approval of IPFF II Project for the purposes of providing Facility Loans
to PFIs to be utilized for financing infrastructure Investment Projects/Subprojects through the
provision of Infrastructure Financing.
12. “Facility Access Agreement” or “FAA” means each agreement to be entered into between BB and
each PFI setting out the terms and conditions of the Facility Loan to be made to such PFI in
accordance with the requirements of the Operations Manual and Part C of Schedule 4 to the FA of
IPFF II Project.
13. “Facility Loan” means any loan provided by BB to PFIs under FAA for the purpose of providing
Infrastructure Financing.
14. “Fiscal Year” means the GoB’s Fiscal Year commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30 of the
following year.
15. “General Conditions” means the “International Development Association General Conditions for
Credits and Grants”, dated July 31, 2010, with the modifications set forth in Section II of the
Appendix of FA of IPFF II Project
16. “Investment Sponsor” means a private enterprise or an enterprise in which private shareholders have
majority ownership, and to which a PFI proposes to make or has made an Infrastructure Financing.
17. “Infrastructure Financing” means either: loans, or guarantees, or equity and/or any other financing
instrument appropriately developed, assessed and approved and made available by a PFI out of the
proceeds of the Facility for financing Subprojects, each in accordance with criteria, requirements,
and procedures set out in the OM.

--- Page 40 ---
34

18. “Infrastructure Financing Agreement” means each agreement entered into between a PFI and an
Investment Sponsor setting out the terms and conditions of the Infrastructure Financing and meeting
the requirements of Part D of Schedule 4 of the FA of IPFF II Project
19. “Investment Project” or “Subproject” means a specific Investment Project in the infrastructure sector
to be carried out by an Investment Sponsor utilizing the proceeds of an Infrastructure Financing.
20. “Master Facility Agreement” means each agreement entered into between BB and a PFI setting out
the terms and conditions of the Facility Loans and meeting the requirements of Part B of Schedule 4
to the FA.
21. “Operating Costs” means the reasonable costs required for the day-to-day coordination,
administration and supervision of Project activities, including leasing and/or routine repair and
maintenance of vehicles, equipment, facilities and office premises, office supplies, utilities,
consumables, communication expenses, translation, printing, photocopying and postal expenses,
bank charges, advertising expenses, insurance, costs of clearing, forwarding, inspection, survey and
transportation of goods, Project-related meeting expenses, and Project-related travel, providing that
payment is made using the banking system; excluding salaries, allowances and honorarium of
officials of the GoB’s civil service and/or other honorarium of any other nature, per diem, and fuel.
22. “Operations Manual” means the manual, , acceptable to the IDA and referred to in paragraph B(a) of
Section I of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement, setting forth implementation, organizational,
administrative, monitoring and evaluation, financial management, disbursement, and procurement
arrangements for purposes of implementation of the Project, and the criteria and requirements for
Subprojects and PFIs, and the terms and conditions for Facility Loans and Infrastructure Financing,
as said manual may be revised from time to time with the prior written agreement of the World
Bank, and such term includes any annexes or schedules to such manual.
23. “PFI” and “Participating Financial Institution” mean a Non-Bank Financial Institution and/or a
private sector scheduled Commercial Bank that meets the eligibility criteria for participating in the
Project as set out in the Operations Manual.
24. “PPP” means public-private partnerships.
25. “PPPA” means the GoB’s Public-Private Partnership Authority or any successor thereto.
26. “Procurement Plan” means the GoB’s procurement plan for the Project, dated March 4, 2017 and
provided for under Section IV of the Procurement Regulations, as the same may be updated from
time to time in agreement with IDA.
27. “Procurement Regulations” means the “World Bank Procurement Regulations for Borrowers under
Investment Project Financing”, dated July 1, 2016.
28. “Training” means the reasonable costs required for the participation of personnel involved in
training activities, workshops and study tours under the Project which have been approved by the
IDA in writing , including: (a) travel, hotel, and subsistence costs for training, workshop and study
tour participants provided that such allowances are paid directly to the eligible recipient using the

--- Page 41 ---
35

banking system; (b) costs associated with rental of training and workshop facilities, preparation and
reproduction of training and workshop materials, costs of academic degree studies, and other costs
directly related to training course, workshop or study tour preparation and implementation, but
excluding salaries of civil servants and honorarium of any other nature.
29. “World Bank Performance Standards” mean the eight IFC Performance Standards that have been
adopted by the World Bank as the World Bank Performance Standards for Projects Supported by the
Private Sector for application to World Bank support for projects (or components thereof) that are
designed, owned, constructed and/or operated by a private entity, in lieu of the World Bank’s
safeguard policies.

--- Page 42 ---
36

Annexure 1

Eligibility Criteria for Enlistment as PFI
Notes:
1. An application for joining IPFF II Project should include the following documents:
 Full set of worked-out criteria based on the latest year-end / half-yearly audited accounts
 Detail workings in support of the results such as calculations, schedules, etc.
 Other documents as specified below.
2. The workings have to be certified by the auditors.
3. Accounts should be completed using acceptable accounting standards (IFRS).
4. To determine eligibility of PFIs under IPFF II, IPFF II Project Cell will consider the totality of the
eligibility criteria in a manner that will establish acceptable quality of
a) Management, b) Profitable and Sustainable Operations, c) Appropriate Capacity (including
Staffing for carrying out Subproject Appraisal with Environmental Assessment and for Supervising
Subproject Implementation). Under special circumstances post-funding monitoring may be done, d)
Capacity to Mobilize Domestic Resources, e) Appropriate Prudential Policies, Administrative
Structure and Business Procedures, and g) Sound Financial Position.
5. Temporary non-compliance of any of the eligibility criteria by a PFI shall be reviewed by IPFF II
Project Cell and time-bound waivers may be considered in consultation with IDA, in exceptional
cases only.

Criterion 1: Compliance with licensing requirements of Bangladesh Bank and other relevant
regulators

PFIs must hold a valid license from BB to operate as a private sector scheduled commercial bank or
NBFI. In case of institutions also operating as a merchant bank, must have a valid license from Security
Exchange Commission (SEC).

Please include company details such as -
 Date of incorporation
 Date of receiving License from BB / other regulatory bodies
 Date of commencement of business
 Legal status (Private / Public)
 Date of Initial Public Offering (IPO) (if issued)
 Date of listing on stock exchanges (Dhaka Stock exchange and Chittagong Stock Exchange)
 List of directors along with shareholdings

Criterion 2: Adequacy of provisions

PFIs must meet the provisions requirement as instructed by BB.

Noted Points:
 The PFI has to compare the amount of provision required by BB regulations and the amount of
provision made by the PFI.
 The PFI has to show the breakdown of the above two amounts, that is, how they were calculated.

--- Page 43 ---
37

 The portfolio amount, on which the provision calculations are based, should be consistent with the
portfolio amount used elsewhere. If there is a difference among the portfolio figures used in another
criterion, explanation and supporting calculations should be provided.

Portfolio Calculation:
The total portfolio amount should include the following (if applicable) –
 Lease receivables (including the current portion and not net of provision amount)
 Term finance (including the current portion and not net of provision amount)
 Short-term finances
 Equity investments
 Receivables against bill discounting
 Advances against lease finance and term finance
 Others

Criterion 3: Positive rate of real return

PFIs must have a positive rate of real return which will be calculated as following:



(net earnings after tax for the period / average stockholders’ equity) x 100


1 + the inflation rate [in decimal form]
Noted Points:
 The average stockholders’ equity calculation should exclude any dividend amount paid or
proposed to be paid within 6 months of year-end.
 This criterion needs to show the real rate of return. The year-end inflation rate to be used is
provided in BB publications, such as Economic Trend.

Criterion 4: Capital adequacy ratio

PFIs must meet the minimum regulatory capital adequacy requirement as instructed by BB. PFIs must
show the detailed calculation of risk-weighted assets and breakdown of total capital.

Criterion 5: Leverage ratio

PFIs must meet the minimum leverage ratio as instructed by BB. Leverage ratio will be calculated as

Tier 1 Capital (after related deduction)
Total Exposure (after related deduction)


Criterion 6: Foreign currency net open position

PFIs dealing in foreign currency must meet regulatory requirement on foreign currency net open position
as instructed by BB.

--- Page 44 ---
38

Criterion 7: Non-performing loan (NPL) ratio

PFIs must have an acceptable level of non-performing loan not more than 10 % (ten percent).

Criterion 8: Single or Business group borrower exposure

PFIs must meet single or business group borrower exposure limit as per BB regulation.

Noted Points:
 The PFI would have to provide the top-ten list of exposures.
 Exposure is defined to include both on and off-balance sheet exposure.
 The definition of Single or Business Group shall be consistent with BB regulations

Criterion 9: Insider lending ratio

PFIs must meet minimum insider lending ratio as instructed by BB.

Noted Points:
 The auditors will have to certify that BB definition of ‘insider lending’ has been followed.
 The PFI will provide the list of clients under ‘insider lending’.
 The PFI would have to confirm that the loans / leases are on a standard commercial basis. This
means they are not on concessionary terms e.g. in relation to interest rates, fees, tenors,
amortization & repayment, collateral requirements, etc. If the loans / leases are not on a standard
commercial basis, the FI would have to specify the concessionary terms and explain the reason.

Criterion 10: External credit rating

PFIs must have minimum external credit rating of BB Rating Grade 3 or equivalent rating by external
credit assessment institutions (ECAIs) recognized by BB

Criterion 11: Three years’ financial accounts with clean auditor’s opinion without implied / hidden
qualifications

“Hidden or implicit” qualifications are comments in the notes to the financial statements, which are
material and would have a significantly adverse impact on the financial performance and or financial
position, if fully considered, but are not explicitly mentioned in the official opinion of the auditors.

Criterion 12: Policy documents to establish professional and sound management

i. PFIs must have adequate policies and procedures related to core risk management as prescribed
by BB. They must ensure the compliance and submit the documents as asked by IPFF II.
ii. PFIs must have qualified and experienced management, adequate organization and institutional
capacity for its specific risk profile. They must comment on appropriate capacity, including

--- Page 45 ---
39

staffing, for carrying out appraisal (including environmental and social assessment) of
infrastructure financing/loans to sponsors and for supervising implementation thereof.
iii. PFIs must inform an incident of misconduct or reputational crisis, if any, in written form.

Criterion 13: Environmental and social risk management (ESRM) requirement

PFIs shall have adequate systems and capacity for environmental and social risk management in
accordance with Bangladesh regulations and World Bank5 Performance Standards. Based on the E&S
systems and capacity assessment, as conducted by BB, PFIs shall meet the following minimum eligibility
criteria in order to be considered for financing under IPFF II (these shall be in place before disbursement
of financing by BB): PFIs must meet the following requirements:
Written E& S policy and procedures are in place and approved by the PFI’s senior management.
ii.
PFI designates staff with clearly defined responsibilities for E&S risk management.
iii.
PFI expresses commitment to taking part in E&S training and capacity building activities of BB.
iv.
PFI has read and understood the ESPP document for IPFF II and demonstrates willingness to
comply with it.

Criterion 14: Annual external auditors’ certification as to compliance with quantitative eligibility
criteria

PFIs must submit their eligibility assessment based on the current year-end accounts every year within
the period specified by IPFF II Project Cell.







5 Environmental and Social Performance Standards refer to the “World Bank Performance Standards”, which are IFC
Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability adopted as the “World Bank Performance Standards” in
2013 pursuant WB Operational Policy 4.03. IFC Performance Standards were first introduced in 2006 and updated in 2012.

--- Page 46 ---
40

Annexure 2

Exclusion List

The Project shall not fund any of the following activities:

 Production or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under host country laws or
regulations or international conventions and agreements, or subject to international bans, such as
pharmaceuticals, pesticides/herbicides, ozone depleting substances, PCBs, wildlife or products
regulated under CITES.
 Production or trade in weapons and munitions.1
 Production or trade in alcoholic beverages (excluding beer and wine).1
 Production or trade in tobacco.1
 Gambling, casinos and equivalent enterprises.1
 Production or trade in radioactive materials. This does not apply to the purchase of medical
equipment, quality control (measurement) equipment and any equipment where the Association
considers the radioactive source to be trivial and/or adequately shielded.
 Production or trade in un-bonded asbestos fibers. This does not apply to purchase and use of
bonded asbestos cement sheeting where the asbestos content is less than 20%.
 Drift net fishing in the marine environment using nets in excess of 2.5 km. in length.
 Any activities involving international waterway (as defined in the Association’s Operational
Policy 7.50), or disputed territories (as defined in the Association’s Operational Policy 7.60)

A reasonableness test will be applied when the activities of the project company would have a significant
development impact but circumstances of the country require adjustment to the Exclusion List.

All PFIs, except those engaged in activities specified below, must apply the following exclusions, in
addition to the above described Exclusion List:
Production or activities involving harmful or exploitative forms of forced labor2/harmful child
labor.3
 Commercial logging operations for use in primary tropical moist forest.
 Production or trade in wood or other forestry products other than from sustainably managed
forests.

Footnotes:
1This does not apply to Investment Sponsors who are not substantially involved in these activities. "Not substantially
involved" means that the activity concerned is ancillary to an Investment Sponsor's primary operations.
2Forced labor means all work or service, not voluntarily performed, that is extracted from an individual under threat of force or
penalty.
3Harmful child labor means the employment of children that is economically exploitive, or is likely to be hazardous to, or to
interfere with, the child's education, or to be harmful to the child's health, or physical, mental, spiritual, moral, or social
development.

--- Page 47 ---
41


Annexure 3

List of Environmentally and Socially Sensitive Activities

PFIs will not be permitted to finance Subprojects associated with activities listed in (a)-(d) below where
they, following an assessment process of the PFI’s systems and capacity for environmental and social
risk management conducted by Bangladesh Bank, have been found to lack adequate capacity to assess,
manage, and monitor environmental and social risks associated with Subprojects for which financing will
be sought from the PFI from the proceeds of the Credit.
Activities involving large-scale physical and/ or economic displacement1 resulting from land-
related transactions2
Activities in or near critical habitats3 and /or legally protected areas.
Activities involving adverse impacts on tribes minor races, ethnic sects and communities.4
Activities involving significant adverse impacts on critical cultural heritage5 areas.

Footnotes:
1 In the context of this project, activities involving large-scale physical and/or economic displacement are those that are
expected to affect 200 people or more.
2 As defined in the Performance Standard 5 (paragraph 5).
3 Critical habitat is a subset of both natural and modified habitat that deserves particular attention. Critical habitat includes
areas with high biodiversity value that meet the criteria of the World Conservation Union (IUCN) classification, including
habitats of significant importance for required for critically endangered or endangered species as defined by the IUCN Red
List of Threatened Species; habitats of significant importance for endemic or restricted-range species; habitats supporting
globally significant concentrations of migratory species and /or congregatory species; areas with unique assemblages of
species or which are associated with key evolutionary processes. Primary Forests or forests of High Conservation Value shall
be considered Critical Habitats.
4 The term “tribes minor races, ethnic sects and communities” is used in a generic sense to refer to a distinct social and cultural
group possessing the following characteristics in varying degrees:
Self-identification as members of a distinct cultural group and recognition of this identity by others;
Collective attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories in the project area and to the
natural resources in these habitats and territories;
Customary cultural, economic, social, or political institutions that are separate from those of the mainstream
society or culture; or
A distinct language or dialect, often different from the official language or languages of the country or region in
which they reside.
5Critical cultural heritage consists of (i) the internationally recognized heritage of communities who use, or have used within
living memory the cultural heritage for long-standing cultural purposes; and (ii) legally protected cultural heritage areas,
including those proposed by host governments for such designation.

--- Page 48 ---
42

Annexure 4
Loan Application for Availing Facility Loan


Name and address of the lead/lone PFI with contact person: -----------------------------------------
Name of the contact person with phone number: --------------------------------------------------------
Name and address of other syndication members:
ii. -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii. -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Section A: Particulars of the Infrastructure Project
Name of the infrastructure project:
Sector: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Location of plant/ site of the project: -------------------------------------------------------------------
Name of the ministry/division/ executive agency of GoB/regulator: ------------------------------
Letter of intent/ license issue date: -------------------------------------------------------------------------
Concession and other relevant agreements signing date: ------------------------------------------------
10. Description of the project:
i. Rated capacity of the plant or maximum capacity of the project: ----------------------------------
ii. Budgeted (expected utilization) capacity (in percent): ------------------------------------------------
iii. Break even capacity (in percent): ----------------------------------------------------------------------
iv. Expected economic life of the project: -------------------------------------------------------------------
v. Purpose of the loan: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
vi. Provide a brief description of the project and its development history: ----------------------------
11. Attached a copy of the agreement, if any, between the PFI and the investment sponsor: -----------
12. If the loan already sanctioned to the investment enterprise/Subproject, please provide a copy of
sanction letter of the PFI. Approved the loan by i) MD/CEO, ii) Board iii) Credit Committee or
iv) others: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 49 ---
43

13. Required financial closure deadline: ---------------------------------------------------------------------
14. Required commercial operations date: -----------------------------------------------------------
15. Provide a breakdown of the project cost:

Cost Components
Amount in Million (in BDT or USD )
In Percent






Total fixed cost of the project


Initial working capital


Total cost of the project



Assessment of working capital required should be attached.
16. Description of land of the subproject
i. Where applicable, if land of the project is owned or leased or rented or held otherwise by the
Investment enterprise and provide evidence: ---------------------------------------------------------------
ii. Where the project/ the investment enterprise owns the land and building: Valuation of land and
building assessed by: Credit risk manager / Credit officer of PFI/ Enlisted surveyor of PFI: --------
Please mention and attach copy of the assessment report.
iii. Where land and building, if any, of the project is leased or rented, is there any covenant in the
lease agreement for premature or short notice termination of the agreement: Yes/ No ------------
If Yes, please mention the condition(s) below: ----------------------------------------------------------
17. If any security/ collateral taken from the Investment Sponsor or the promoters: Yes/ No---------
If Yes, i. Description of the collateral: ---------------------------------------------------------------------
ii. Realizable market value: BDT (in million) --------------------------------------------------------
iii. Value assessed by PFI’s Credit Risk Manager/ Officer/ Enlisted surveyor: BDT (in million) -

Section B: Particulars of the Investment Sponsor6
18.
Name of the investment sponsor: ---------------------------------------------------------------------

6 Investment Sponsor means a private enterprise or an enterprise in which private shareholders have majority ownership, and
to which a PFI proposes to make or has made an Infrastructure Financing.

--- Page 50 ---
44

Description of investment sponsor’s business-----------------------------------------------------

Address, telephone, fax and e-mail of the main office: -----------------------------------------
19.
Address, telephone, fax and e-mail of registered office
20.
Mailing address: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
21.
Name and address of company secretary: ------------------------------------------------------------
22.
Date of incorporation: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

23.
Please enter the shareholding and management structure of the investment sponsor in the table
below:
(a) Board of Directors/Partners/Sole proprietor
Name & address
Age
Nationality
% Ownership
Position in the
Company
Personal net worth
(million BDT/USD)












(b) Management
Name
Position
Numbers of years
with the company
Year started in
position
Previous employers & with years (if
present position is less than 3 years)















24.
Please provide the names and specimen signatures of two representatives (one authorized and one
alternate) authorized to deal on behalf of the investment sponsor with IPFF II Project with respect
to this facility:
Name
Position
Signature





Section C: Particulars of the Promoters7
25. Name of the promoters : -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Please provide a brief description of the nature of the promoters’ business: -----------------------

7The Promoter may be a proprietor, partnership or a company or a joint venture, who applied to the government for award of
the project and to whom the LOI has been awarded.

--- Page 51 ---
45

26. Please provide name and address including telephone and e-mail of auditors appointed/to be
appointed by the promoters: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Is there any legal action pending for or against any of the promoters/directors, officers or directors
of any of affiliates of the investment promoters: Yes / No ---------------------------------------------
a. If yes, please describe below in detail: ------------------------------------------------------------------
b. Please provide opinion of PFI’s lawyer/legal advisor on any possible legal risk that may arise
out of the pending legal proceedings and the likely bearing on the business of the promoters:

27.
Particulars of all affiliated companies: BDT (in million)

Company
Name
Year
Established
Nature
of
Business
Nature of
Affiliation
Sales

Net
Worth

Return
on
Investment
(percent)
Banker(s)
Total
outstanding
Loans and
Advances
Total
Classified
Loan
Classified
Loan in
percent
10
11=10/9x100


































28. Is credit information bureau (CIB) report of the investment sponsor and its group members clean:
Yes/ No ----------
If Yes, please enter print date and provide a copy of the CIB Report: ----------------------------------

Section D: Financing Plan
29.
Equity participation by all the sponsors:
Name of the sponsors
Amount in million (BDT or USD)


Total


30. List the amount to be financed by the PFI and other lenders:

Name of the PFI or
other Lenders
Loan Type
Interest
Rate
Tenure
Grace
Period
Amount in million
(BDT or USD)
Status (approved
/ under process)
IPFF II Facility














Sub Total






Non-IPFF part

--- Page 52 ---
46


31.
Amount of facility loan (loan requested from IPFF II) : ----------------------------------------------
32.
Particulars of facility loan (loan from IPFF II):
a. Indicative schedule of loan disbursements required from IPFF II and PFIs:
Milestone
Date
Amount
Source









b. Indicative schedule of loan repayment dates (IPFF II to PFI and PFI to Sponsors):
Date
Amount







Section E: Feasibility of the Project:
33. Ratio analysis: Provide a copy of financial modelling of the investment project:
( The ratios should be calculated taking into account total loans including IPFF II loan facility requested for)


Industry
Average*
YR-2
YR-4
YR-6
YR-8
YR-10
YR-12
YR-15
Liquidity
Ratios










Current ratio
2:1








Quick ratio
1:1







Leverage
Ratios










Debt Equity Ratio
75:25








Debt
Service
Coverage
Ratio(DSCR)
1.2~1.6








Interest Coverage Ratio
Greater
than 1







Profitability
Ratios










Gross Profit Margin









Net Profit Margin









Operating ratio









Return on Asset Ratio
Greater
than
cost
of fund**














Sub Total






Grand total

--- Page 53 ---
47


Return on equity Ratio
Greater
than
cost
of
Equity***

















Activity
Ratios










Total Asset Turnover Ratio









Fixed Asset Turnover Ratio








*Averages mentioned are usual and indicative and vary from Industry to Industry.
**Cost of fund= Weighted cost of equity and borrowed fund.
***Cost of Equity= Opportunity cost of equity.

34. Cost of fund:
Year 2
Year 4
Year 6
Year 8
Year 10
Year 12
Year 15








Please also furnish the following activity ratios, if the condition stated there against holds good:
Condition

Industry
average
YR-2
YR-4
YR-6
YR-8
YR-10
YR-12
YR-15
When sales not captive and/
or payment not guaranteed
Average
Collection
Period (days)









When supply of fuel, raw
material etc not captive and/
or payment not guaranteed
Average
payment
Period (days)









35. Loan life coverage ratio (LLCR):

(NPV of available cash
for debt service up to the
maturity of the loan
divided by principal
outstanding)
Year-2 Year-4 Year-6 Year-8 Year-10
Year-12
Year-15








36. Cash flow analysis:
Pay Back Period of the project (number of years)

Internal Rate of Return(IRR)

37. Risk factors:
Please tick if YES or NO for the followings:
YES
NO
N/A (Please mention Why
Not Applicable)
a. If spare parts guaranteed



b. If technical know how provided or guaranteed



c. If uninterrupted supply of raw material guaranteed



d. If uninterrupted supply of fuel and power guaranteed



e. If sales captive or guaranteed



f. Is the management experienced in similar business

--- Page 54 ---
48


38. Technical viability of site of the plant/ project:
Please tick Yes or No if site of the project is viable in respect of the
followings:
Yes
No
N/A (Please mention Why
Not Applicable)
a. Proximity of supplies (raw material, fuel, power, spare parts,
technical know how etc)



b. Proximity of customers/market



c. Availability of local and associated infrastructure, including
utilities, transportation, communication and off take capabilities.



d. Availability of access rights, local consent, license etc



e. Suitability of ground and local climate conditions



f. Availability of local technical and suitable management staff and
skilled labor for operation.



g. Availability of local equipment, material, spare parts and sub
contractors for construction.



h. Minimizing cost of land, construction and operations



i. Scope for setting out of the works and expansion



j. If located above flood level




If site of the project is not viable in respect of any of the above factors, please mention below how the problem will be
mitigated ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
39. Provide the project appraisal report and/or information memorandum(IM) prepared by the PFI: ----
40. Provide a copy of feasibility study report by ministry/division/investment sponsor: ---------------------

Section F: Procurement Aspects
41. Provide a copy of best/standard commercial practices for procurement activities undertaken by the
subprojects as per OM of IPFF II Project
42. Tick the method of selection of the promoter : Whether:

The executing agency selected the promoter competitively following international competitive
bidding (ICB)



The executing agency selected the promoter through competitive bidding other than ICB


Selection of the promoter through competition is not possible, e.g. expansion by an existing
concessionaire or captive power plants


Selection of the promoter, not through public tender (no concession), but through an open
licensing process

For projects awarded on the basis of competition, please provide:
1. A copy of the advertisement for expressions of interest in the project
2. A copy of the request for proposal (RFP)

--- Page 55 ---
49

3. A copy of the proposal submitted by the Company which was the basis for selection and
issuance of the Letter of Intent
4. Other relevant information

43.
Please provide the plan of procurement of major plant and equipment by the promoter8 . In case of
existing plant, please provide the name and process of major equipments procurement including
documents:

Name of the
machine
Country of Origin
Model
Number of
Machines
Total Rated
Capacity
Value in Million BDT





















Section G: Environmental and Social Compliance

44. IPFF II requires that the project:
be screened for potential environmental and social impacts
ii.
meet national environmental, labor, and social requirements
iii.
avoid any excluded activities
iv.
comply with World Bank Performance Standards9

45.
Please enter the current phase and progress of development of the project in the table:

Phase
Percentage
Accomplished
Preconstruction

Construction

Operation


46. Environmental and Social Risk Rating
a. Please indicate the environmental category of the project as per Department of Environment
(DoE): Green/Orange A/Orange B/ Red:__________________________________________
b. Date DoE category was assigned : ________________________________________________
c. Please indicate E&S risk rating as per Bangladesh Bank ESRM Guidelines and IPFF II E&S
Policy (on the basis of E&S risk screening or ESIA, as available):
High Risk 
Medium Risk 



8including L/Cs, if any
9 Environmental and Social Performance Standards refer to the “World Bank Performance Standards”, which are IFC
Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability adopted as the “World Bank Performance Standards” in
2013 pursuant WB Operational Policy 4.03. IFC Performance Standards were first introduced in 2006 and updated in 2012.

--- Page 56 ---
50

47. Excluded and restricted activities
a. Please indicate whether any activities on the List of Excluded Activities are present: Yes/ No
b. Please indicate if any activities on the Bangladesh Bank ESRM Guidelines Exclusion List are
present: Yes/ No
c. Please indicate if any activities on the List of Environmentally and Socially Sensitive activities
are present.

48.
Core E&S risk management requirements
Please mention below key requirements placed on the project by the executing agency/regulator
for compliance with requirements of DoE

If ESIA/EIA is prepared, it is in compliance with the requirements of both the DoE and the
World Bank’s Performance Standards: YES /NO

If resettlement/ economic displacement is involved, please describe current/ past process
(responsible agency, plans prepared, number of affected persons, timeline etc.)

If there are impacts on tribes minor races, ethnic sects and communities,10 please describe any
government process to date ______________________________________________________

If impacts on critical habitats11 are expected, please describe any measures already taken by the
Sponsor to avoid or minimize them (e.g. though adjusting project design)__________________
If there are impacts on critical cultural heritage,12 please describe their nature and any measures
already undertaken to avoid or minimize them______________________________________

10 The term “tribes minor races, ethnic sects and communities” is used in a generic sense to refer to a distinct social and
cultural group possessing the following characteristics in varying degrees:
Self-identification as members of a distinct cultural group and recognition of this identity by others;
Collective attachment to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories in the project area and to the
natural resources in these habitats and territories;
Customary cultural, economic, social, or political institutions that are separate from those of the mainstream
society or culture; or
A distinct language or dialect, often different from the official language or languages of the country or region in
which they reside.
11 Critical habitat is a subset of both natural and modified habitat that deserves particular attention. Critical habitat includes
areas with high biodiversity value that meet the criteria of the World Conservation Union (IUCN) classification, including
habitats of significant importance for required for critically endangered or endangered species as defined by the IUCN Red
List of Threatened Species; habitats of significant importance for endemic or restricted-range species; habitats supporting
globally significant concentrations of migratory species and /or congregatory species; areas with unique assemblages of
species or which are associated with key evolutionary processes. Primary Forests or forests of High Conservation Value shall
be considered Critical Habitats.

--- Page 57 ---
51

Documents to be submitted:
 Date of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment or Environmental and Social Audit,
as available (please attach) ___________________________________________________
 Please furnish a copy of SCC/ESIA/ECC, if obtained from DOE
 List E&S risk management plans available from Investment Sponsor__________________
 Resettlement Action Plan (if applicable) ________________________________________
 Please furnish Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) prepared by the financial
institution and agreed with the Investment Sponsor to ensure compliance with World Bank
Performance Standards
49. Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)

IPFF II requires that PFIs shall meet the following minimum eligibility criteria in order to be
considered for financing under IPFF II (these shall be in place before disbursement of financing
by BB):

Minimum ESRM Eligibility Criteria
Remarks
(Yes/No)
1 Written E&S policy and procedures are in place
and approved by the PFI’s CEO/MD/ Board of Directors

2 PFI designates staff with clearly defined responsibilities for E&S
risk management senior management are in place

3 PFI expression commitment to taking part in E&S training and
capacity building activities of BB

Please state if the financial institution has an E&S policy approved by senior management (is
yes, attach a copy)
Please indicate if there is staff formally responsible for E&S risk management
Please describe E&S monitoring arrangements for the investment
Current E&S performance rating as per IPFF II E&S Policy (if one is assigned) ____________
50. DoE Clearance to be obtained depending on the category of the project is given below:
Please tick YES or NO and, if NO, enter the expected date of delivery for the applicable category
only
Category
of
the Project
DoE Certificate Obtained or Not
YES
NO
If ‘NO’, expected
date of receiving
Certificate
Green
Environmental Clearance Certificate
(ECC)



Orange-A/
Orange-B
Site Clearance Certificate (SCC)



ECC




Red


SCC



Approval of TOR for EIA/ESIA



Approval of EIA/ESIA



ECC




12 5Critical cultural heritage consists of (i) the internationally recognized heritage of communities who use, or have used within
living memory the cultural heritage for long-standing cultural purposes; and (ii) legally protected cultural heritage areas,
including those proposed by host governments for such designation.

--- Page 58 ---
52


51.
If the project, as per ECR ’97, belongs to RED, ORANGE-B or ORANGE-A category and as per
WB SGP belongs to Category-A or Category-B, does the list of machinery and equipment to be
imported or under import include equipment for ETP, incinerator, waste recycling plant, noise
and heat control devices and other applicable equipment as prescribed by DoE and as per
IEE/EIA and EMP: YES/NO ---------------------------------------------------------------

Section H: Miscellaneous
52.
Provide a copy of document checklist as per Annexure 5 of OM
53.
Undertakings and Representations:
The PFI agrees to give the following undertakings and makes the following representations:
i. that the Promoter has provided/ensured/committed to provide equity as mentioned in OM; and
ii. the PFI has committed to finance rest of the debt amount excluding IPFF II facility and
Sponsor’s equity
iii. the PFI will follow the terms and conditions mentioned in the OM of IPFF II Project
Name of Authorized
Representatives (PFI)
Signature
Date

--- Page 59 ---
53

Annexure 5
Document Checklist
(Please tick (√), if Yes. If No, write the appropriate Status /reason in the Remarks column)


Documents
Check
Comment

General Aspects


1. Loan Application (Annexure 4) from PFI requesting the amount of fund
along with the duly filled in loan application form.


2. A copy of the summary details of Investment Project as per Annexure 6 of
Operations Manual (OM)


3. Confirmation that PFI has agreed with Sponsor in writing as per Annexure
7 of OM (providing the PFI the right to inspect and access to project
information)


Copy of Investment Project/Request from Sponsor to PFI


Copy of PFI’s draft Sanction Letter, which includes the proposed terms
and conditions of the Investment Project


Conformation that the proposed infrastructure financing does not include
under the list of Excluded Activities (Annexure 2)


Whether the proposed infrastructure project are listed in the list of
Environmentally and Socially Sensitive Activities (Annexure 3)



Investment Project


Copy of Investment Project Appraisal report by PFI and detailed study
report by Investment Sponsor including



a) Project Location and Site Map



b) Shareholding Structure of Project Company


c) Management Team and proposed organizational structure of Sponsors
and management competency


d) Memorandum and Article of Association and Certificate of
incorporation of Project Company


e) Profiles/experience of Parties involved in project development and
operation and maintenance


f) Proposed Security package/ security related all supporting paper


g) Project Implementation Schedule depicting Current Status of the
project


h) Description of Major Equipment to be installed in the Project


i) Technical details along with Process Flow Diagram


j) Proven Performance of Major Equipment


9. Confirmation that Investment Project is not located inside a protected area


10. Land entitlement evidence in case of Investment Enterprise owns the land


11. Valuation report on land and building made by credit risk manager/ credit
officer/ enlisted surveyor of PFI if available.

--- Page 60 ---
54


Documents
Check
Comment

Sponsors/ Promotors


12. Experience of Sponsors in implementing similar Project


13. Sponsor Details:


a) Profile/ Corporate Background and Experience


b) Last three years audited balance sheet and income statement


c) Clean, current Credit Information Bureau Report (no more than 90
days old from submission of the proposal), all local shareholder
directors and associated companies.



Lender's/ Financial Aspects


14. Proposed Financing Arrangement of the project confirms IPFF II
requirement


15. Arrangement of utilization of equity (amount and in percentage) by the
sponsors


16. Arrangement of sharing the rest of the financing (excluding IPFF II and
sponsor’s equity)by PFI’s own resources and/or other institutions


17. Investment Project Payment/Amortization Schedule along with terms and
condition (indicative)
a) Repayment from PFI to BB
b) Repayment from Investment Project to PFI


18. Financial Model including debt service coverage ratio and other financial
ratios / statements


19. Independent Engineer’s Report, if any



Procurement Aspects


20. Details of Sponsor’s Procurement Process with evidence including
submitted tender documents, RFQ, RFP, newspaper clippings etc.


21. Procurement Plan of the Sponsor’s for major machineries and equipment
with current status.


22. Standard commercial practices followed in procurement


23. Undertaking of PFI and Sponsor that the assets will be procured as per
procedures described in the OM under the proposed financing.



Commercial Aspects


24. Copy of Concession Agreement(s)


25. License from relevant Regulatory Authority


26. Consent/permit from Local Administrative Authority.


27. Arrangement of Insurance policy for usual risks


28. Copy(ies) of EPC contract / Turnkey contract / Spare parts supply contract
/ O &M contract / Equipment supply contract / Civil construction contract
/ Land development contract / any other relevant contracts

--- Page 61 ---
55


Documents
Check
Comment

Environmental and Social Aspects


29. Compliance with environmental and social aspects as per DoE
requirements, and ESPP requirements of IPFF II Project.


30. Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) report


31. Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report


32. Feedback from Consultation with Stakeholders (if not included in ESIA
report)


33. PFI’s own Environmental and Social Assessment report (if any)


34. Resettlement Action Plan(RAP) (in case of Involuntary Resettlement), if
required


35. Indigenous peoples development plan (IPDP) if required


36. Clearance certificate of DoE enclosed (SCC, ECC etc.)

--- Page 62 ---
56

Annexure 6
Summary Details of Investment Project

Name of the PFI:

i) Profile and Appraisal of the Infrastructure Investment Project
01
Name of Investment Sponsor

02
Legal Status

03
Nature of business

04
Sub-sector

05
Location of the plant/project

06
Group Name

07
Cost of the project

08
Expected life of the project

09
Objective of the project.

10
Scope and strategy of the project.

11
Projected financials (BDT in milllion)
: Average Revenue:
: Average Net Income:
: Average cash flow
: Average Equity
: Average Repayment
Yr 1-3
Yr 4-6
Yr 7-9
Yr 10-12
Yr-13-15

12
Technical feasibility of site of the project

13
Loan or Lease

14
Loan/Lease amount

15
Total group exposure of the Sponsor


16
If the Project was not awarded on the basis of
Competition, description of the best commercial
procurement practice used or will be used

17
Main Machinery and equipment to be procured,
with value and country of origin (Attach detail list)
Mach & Eqpt. Origin (BDT Value)
18
Sponsors repayment record

19
i) PFI’s appraisal report on the Investment project
(enclose).
ii)If the project already started operation, PFI’s
appraisal report on viability and feasibility of the
project on the basis of the latest audited/ unaudited
Financial Statements, performance reports and
compliance status of ESMP.

20
Financial plan (Equity and debt)

21
Description of assets to be financed

22
Sponsor-PFI relationship
(new or existing)
23
Insurance status

24
Environmental Category of the project
DoE:______ WB:_______

--- Page 63 ---
57


ii) Terms and conditions of the Infrastructure Financing
Purpose of the loan

Amount of the loan in BDT/USD

Period of Loan/Lease( max. 20 years as required)
Grace period

Maturity date

Interest rate( as per PFI’s lending practice)

Disbursement Schedule ( and amount disbursed,
if any)
Milestone, Date, Amount(Sch).
Amount(Disb)
8 i) Repayment /Amortisation schedule
ii) Does the Repayment /Amortisation schedule conform to
amortisation schedule for Facility loan (Essentially, it must
conform):
Enter/
Enclose
Yes/No

09 Description of Security





(Authorised signature of the PFI)

--- Page 64 ---
58

Annexure 7

Undertaking by the PFI

1. The PFI will confirm that the Investment Project, for which the financing is sought, will be carried
out with due diligence and efficiency and in accordance with sound technical, financial and
managerial standards; that the Investment Project will maintain adequate project records; and that
PFI/IPFF II Project Cell/IDA will have the right of inspection.

2. The PFI shall obtain the right to inspect, by itself or jointly with representatives of the IDA and
IPFF II Project Cell, such assets and sites, works, plants and construction included in the
Investment Project, the operation thereof, and any relevant records and documents.

3. The PFI shall obtain the right to obtain all such information as IPFF II Project Cell, the IDA or the
PFI reasonably request relating to the foregoing and to the administration, operation and financial
condition of the Investment Sponsor and to the benefits to be derived from the Investment project.

4. The PFI shall obtain the right to suspend or terminate the right of the Sponsor to the use of IDA
funding upon failure by the Sponsor to perform its obligations under contract with the PFI.



(Authorised signature of the PFI)

--- Page 65 ---
59


Annexure 8

Quarterly Report of PFI on Infrastructure Financing

As on---------------


SL.
Name of the
Investment
Sponsor
Sector
Loan
No
Sanction
Date
Sanction
amount
Disbursed
amount as
of---
Outstanding
amount as of-
Overdue
Instalment
amount
Recovery
during the
quarter
Cumulative
recovery as of
Remarks

--- Page 66 ---
60

Annexure 9
Figure showing IPFF II Project Implementation Arrangements



IDA

GoB
BB PIU
(IPFF II Project Cell)

PFIs
TA Component
Advisory Services to
PPPA and BIFFL
PPPA
BIFFL
IDA Credit:
USD 100 million Scale Up Facility
(SUF) + USD 256.70 million IDA
GoB Credit:
USD 60 00 million equivalent BDT
Project implementation services
under the Administration Agreement
with the GoB.
Covered by the TA component
BIFFL also a
PFI and will
deploy
innovative
infrastructure
finance
instruments
Financing Component - BB loans to
PFIs - under the Master Facility
Agreement. Lending in USD and
BDT, at fixed and variable rates for
8-20 years maturities.

Private Infrastructure Projects
Implemented by private sponsors.
Government approved/endorsed (by
appropriate authority/licensed by competent
authority in applicable case).
Complaint with all applicable country
legislation, especially on E&S as confirmed
by a relevant authority
Key agreements governing IPFF II
 Between the GoB and IDA: Financing Agreement
 Between the GoB and BB: Administration Agreement
 Between BB and advisors: Technical Service Agreement
 Between BB and the PFIs: Master Facility Agreement
(MFA, umbrella agreement for the PFIs’ participation in
the project) and Facility Access Agreements (FAA, for
individual loans to PFIs)
PFI loans to infra projects.
Lending at PFI rates for 8-20
years maturities.
Max 20% of total Component
1 allocation per infrastructure
project. Up to 50% of project
cost can be financed by
IPFF II
Technical Advisors/
Consultants
The TA component
- advisory services
to all project
stakeholders
arranged by PIU

--- Page 67 ---
61

Annexure 10
Grievance Redress Mechanism

Introduction:

The purpose of this document is to define the procedure for managing Subproject affected community’s
concerns and complaints (referred to as “grievances”) in a planned, timely, and respectful manner.

This grievance redress mechanisms has been prepared to fulfill the obligation of IDA for funding IPFF II
project.

The main purpose of this grievance redress mechanism is to effectively and proactively manage a
community’s feedback, grievances or concerns with a Subproject about its operations. By facilitating a
two way communication, a grievance mechanism can enhance outcomes by giving people satisfaction
that their voices are being heard and that the authority of the Subproject would take necessary steps to
resolve the issues.

Objectives:

The objectives of the grievance redress mechanisms are to:
 Provide accessible avenues for the project affected communities for those infrastructure projects
that have been financed under IPFF, or are in the process of seeking financing, to contact IPFF II
Project in order to lodge complaints;
 Provide a mechanism for addressing grievances of project affected communities in a timely and
effective manner.

Scope:

The grievance redress mechanism will manage grievances from project affected communities where IPFF
II Project finance will be involved. It applies to all grievances that arise as a consequence of any related
activity for projects financed through IPFF II (this includes any concerns or complaints about actions or
impacts of any project contractors). This grievance redress mechanisms does not impede access to other
judicial or administrative remedies that might be available under domestic law or through existing
arbitration procedures.
It should also be noted that each infrastructure project financed through IPFF II Project Cell will be
requested to have in place a project-level grievance redress mechanisms that affected communities may
use to raise their concerns with project developers. Sponsors will also be requested to make communities
aware of the IPFF II grievance redress mechanisms.
All complaints received under this procedure shall be tracked until close out. IPFF II will provide a
timely response to every concern or complaint submitted, however reserves the right not to engage in a
resolution process for a complaint which it reasonably considers no more than general, unspecified, and
therefore un-actionable or concerns a matter for which IPFF II has no formal responsibility (for example,
a matter that the government controls).

--- Page 68 ---
62



Submission of a Complaint to IPFF II Project Cell:

A complaint can be submitted by one or more individuals or groups who believe they are directly and
adversely affected by an active IPFF II financed Subproject.

The complainant can request to keep their identity confidential. In that case the personal details of
complainants would only be made available to those involved in the resolution of the grievance in
question.

Unfortunately, anonymous complaints cannot be responded to by the IPFF II Project. However, if an
anonymous complaint contains relevant information about specific IPFF II financed project related
issues, IPFF II Project Cell will also forward it to the concerned Participating Financial Institution that
financed that project for information and follow-up, where appropriate.

Complaint(s) to IPFF II could be submitted directly by affected people in one of the ways outlinedbelow:

 Via email: bb.ipff@bb.org.bd
 Via fax: +88-02-9530193
 Via mail:
Project Director
IPFF II Project Cell (24th Floor)
Bangladesh Bank, Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000

Grievance redress mechanisms process:

The grievance redress mechanisms process could be outlined as below:



















Receive and Register
Grievance
Acknowledge
Screen
Investigate
Respond
Resolved Successfully
Appeal
Follow up and close out

--- Page 69 ---
63

Registering Grievances:

Grievances will be logged in the Grievance Register within two days of receiving the grievance. Project
Director of IPFF II Project will assign an IPFF II Project Cell official (grievance officer) to deal with the
grievances. The concerned official will be responsible for:
• Defining and implementing resolution actions.
• Investigating the grievance.
• Making sure resolution actions are completed.
• Tracking progress of individual grievances.
• Responding: Aggregating and forwarding feedback to Complainants.
• Documenting resolution actions.
• Gaining necessary approvals from, and reporting to the management.

Acknowledge grievance:

The Grievance Officer will formally acknowledge grievance within 5 working days of the submission of
the grievance, informing the complainant that IPFF II intends to respond within 20 working days.

Screen:
Each grievance will be screened as either “routine” or “potentially significant” in order to determine the
appropriate response.

Investigate:
The grievance officer will lead grievance investigation, when needed, which could include collecting
relevant documents, making site visits, consulting appropriate internal staff, contacting external
stakeholders, and other activities. Investigation findings will be used to document decision making
process and inform proposed remedy.

Respond:
If the grievance is classified as routine, grievance officer will define plan for grievance response and craft
the draft response for approval from Project Director. In case of “potentially significant” type grievance,
the grievance officer will work collaboratively with the concerned PFI and the entrepreneur to take
remedial action. The responses have to be cleared by the Project Director.

Follow up and closed out:
If the complainant accepts the proposed resolution, the agreed actions will be implemented. The
grievance officer will be responsible for assigning action parties, actions, and deadlines to implement the
resolution. After resolution, the grievance should be formally closed out.

Appeal:
In cases where a complainant is unsatisfied with and/or unwilling to accept the resolution actions
proposed, the complainant can appeal to revisit the grievance. In that case, the complainant has to
produce sufficient reasoning behind the unacceptance of the resolution. Where complainant(s) are not
satisfied with the resolution provided by IPFF II Project, they can be advised of other avenues that may
be available to them to address the issues.