--- Page 1 ---
www.bb.org.bd
Payment Systems Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.


15 February, 2022
PSD Circular No: 04/2022 Date: -------------------------
02 Falgun, 1428



Managing Directors/Chief Executive Officers
All Scheduled Banks/MFS Providers/Financial Institutions and Other Concerns


Dear Sir,

Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022


As per Section 7A(e) and section 82 of the Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 and
Section 26 (cha) of the Bank Companies Act, 1991 Bangladesh Bank has issued a revised
regulations titled "Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022". The
new regulations will replace the previously issued "Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services
(MFS) Regulations, 2018" and shall come into effect immediately.


The regulations can be collected from the website (www.bb.org.bd) of Bangladesh
Bank.


Enclosure:
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services
(MFS) Regulations, 2022.
Sincerely Yours,



(Muhommad Badiuzzaman Dider)
General Manager (Current Charge)
Phone: 9530611

--- Page 2 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 1 of 12

1.0
Introduction



The financial sector in Bangladesh is continuously growing in response to the evolving
needs of the growing economy. Rapid expansion of mobile phone users, modernization
of payments and financial systems based on IT infrastructure, country-wide reach of
mobile network and internet have boost up the opportunities for enhancing Mobile
Financial Services (MFS) to offer convenient payment mode which is cost efficient and
prompt for the underserved, un-banked/under-banked and low income group of
population of our country.

Since the inception of MFS in 2011, Bangladesh experienced a robust growth in number
of account holders, volume and amount of transactions in MFS. In order to fulfill the
goal of financial inclusion and growing market demand with a view to ensuring customer
interest and strengthening the payment ecosystem, initiative has been taken to amend the
existing Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2018. With a view
to providing an orderly, enabling and competitive environment for optimal utilization of
the new windows of opportunity for extension of the traditional financial services, the
Board of Directors of Bangladesh Bank (BB), in terms of Section 7A(e) and section 82 of
the Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 and in terms of Section 26 (cha) of Bank Companies
Act, 1991 has decided to issue Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS)
Regulations, 2022 replacing the Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS)
Regulations, 2018 issued in July 2018 and its subsequent amendments. Bangladesh
Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022 will be in effect along with the
Bangladesh Payment and Settlement Systems Regulations, 2014, Guidelines for Trust
Fund Management for Payment and Settlement Services or any other law(s) shall come
into effect regarding these regulations.

2.0
Purposes



The purposes of these Regulations are to:



Provide regulatory framework to create an enabling and competitive environment
to cater cost efficient and prompt MFS;



(ii) Promote convenient access to formal financial services at an affordable cost
especially for the poor and unbanked population segments; and



(iii) Ensure compliance with Anti Money Laundering and Combating Financing of
Terrorism (AML/CFT) standards set by AML/CFT rules, regulations, guidelines
and instructions issued by Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit (BFIU).

3.0
Definitions






Agent/ Retail Agent/ Authorized Agent: An entity authorized by MFS provider to carry
out financial transactions for mobile financial services on behalf of MFS provider.






Bank/Financial Institution/Government Entity-led (Bank/FI/Government Entity-
led) MFS Model: Subject to the provision of their concerned law/Act,
Bank/FI/Government Entity-led MFS is a model where Mobile Financial Services
Provider (MFSP) will be a subsidiary of a scheduled commercial Bank/FI licensed by
Bangladesh Bank or Government Entity with at least 51% of the share held by the
Bank/FI/ Government Entity with control of the board.

--- Page 3 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 2 of 12



Cash-in: Exchange of cash for electronic value (e-money).



Cash-out: Exchange of electronic value (e-money) for cash.






Cross Border Payment Transaction: Cross-border transactions include both outbound
and inbound transfers of money between related entities residing or operating in different
countries.






Distributor/ Super Agent: Any third party acting on behalf of a MFS provider to deal
directly with retail agents. Generally, MFS providers nominate or select the
Distributors/Super Agents in a geography and demography basis. Distributors/Super
Agents have an agreement with MFS provider and is liable for nominating or selecting
and managing the retail agents. Distributors/Super Agents will only deal with e-money in
bulk with MFS provider and sell/purchase the e-money to/from the retail agent.






Distribution Channel: A distribution channel is a chain of businesses or intermediaries
through which electronic money passes from MFS provider to Distributors/Super Agents
to Agents/Retail Agents to the end users/customers.






Electronic money: Electronic money (e-money) means electronically stored monetary
value issued against or as an alternative to legal tender; which can be used as a mode of
payment; and is accepted by any person including its issuer.






Equity Partner: An equity partner is an equity share holder of the company, and is
entitled to a proportion of the distributable profits of the company.






Financial Institution (FI): Financial Institution means “Financial Institution” defined in
Financial Institution Act, 1993.



Government Entity: Any agency, division, directorate etc. under jurisdiction of
Executive Division of Government of the People‟s Republic of Bangladesh.



Government Security: A debt instrument issued by the Government of Bangladesh.






Interoperability: Interoperability refers to the set of arrangements/procedures that
allows participants in different systems to conduct and settle payments or securities
transactions across systems while continuing to operate only in their own respective
systems.






Inward Foreign Remittance: Inward foreign remittance is transfer of foreign currency
in Bangladesh by Bangladeshi nationals living abroad via a legal channel (Banks, Money
Transfer Organizations and Exchange Houses etc).






Mobile Financial Services (MFS): MFS refers to E-money services provided against a
particular mobile/cell phone number of a client (termed as Mobile Account), where the
record of funds is stored on the electronic general ledger. These services can be draw-
down through specific payment instructions to be issued from the bearer‟s mobile phone
or through alternative digital process or device by ensuring authenticity of the
transaction.

--- Page 4 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 3 of 12


Operational Account: Account maintained by MFS providers with scheduled
commercial banks for operational purposes other than custody/settlement purpose.






Oversight: The activities carried out by BB to monitor and analyze the key indicators of
MFS as part of the national payment systems, assessing them against payment systems
objectives and where necessary, inducing change to promote safety and efficiency.






Parent Bank/FI/Government Entity: One single bank/FI/Government Entity that holds
at least 51% of the equity share capital along with controlling voting rights in the board
of directors of the MFS providing subsidiary.






Payment Services Provider (PSP): "Payment services provider" refers to an entity
licensed by Bangladesh Bank to provide electronic money services to its customers and
keep the aggregate balance of the issued e-money to a Trust Cum Settlement Account in
a scheduled commercial bank.






Principal(s): Banks and financial institutions licensed by Bangladesh Bank (BB), Micro
Finance Institutions (MFIs) licensed by the Microcredit Regulatory Authority (MRA),
Insurance Companies licensed by Insurance Development and Regulatory Authority of
Bangladesh (IDRA) for which MFS provider is acting as an agent for disbursing loans
and in accepting repayments.






Settlement: "Settlement" means the act of discharging obligations by transferring funds
between two or more parties.






Settlement Bank: "Settlement bank" means a bank maintaining Trust Cum Settlement
Account for the Mobile Financial Services Provider (MFSP).






Subsidiary: A company shall be deemed to be a subsidiary of another company, if that
other company controls the composition of Board of Directors of the first mentioned
company and that other company holds more than half in nominal value of its equity
share capital.






Technology Partner: A technology partner provides technical support to MFS
providers.






Trust Cum Settlement Account/Custodian Account: Trust cum Settlement Account
(TCSA) means a custody account where the legal tender shall be stored against the
issuance of e-money by a Payment Service Provider, or where the legal tender that
received from the service recipient of the Payment System Operator or any other
authorized entity for maintaining such account, and the balance of the account shall not
be used for any purpose other than the approved ones.






Trust Fund: Trust Fund will comprise of any fund held by a payment service
participants or any entity authorized by Bangladesh Bank to do so, that creates a liability
of the service providing entity to its customers and, or participants.






Valid Identity: The documents determined as per the directive of Bangladesh Financial
Intelligence Unit (BFIU) to open MFS account.

--- Page 5 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 4 of 12

4.0
Scope






Bangladesh Bank will allow only scheduled commercial Bank/Financial Institution/
Government Entity-led MFS (Bank/FI/Government Entity-led MFS) in Bangladesh. The
provision of these regulations shall apply to MFS providers in Bangladesh.

MFS Provider will act as a Payment Service Provider (PSP) as defined in the Bangladesh
Payment and Settlement Systems Regulations, 2014. To provide MFS, scheduled
commercial bank or financial institution licensed by Bangladesh Bank or Government
Entity, will establish subsidiary with bank or non-bank entity as equity partner and take
license as PSP from Payment Systems Department of Bangladesh Bank.

5.0
Products of MFS






5.1
BB permits Bank/FI/ Government Entity-led MFS providers as PSP to deliver
the following broad categories of payment services in Bangladesh:





'Cash-in' to and 'Cash-out' from MFS accounts through agent locations,
bank branches, ATM, Cards, linked bank accounts and other methods
approved by BB;






(ii)
Person to Business payments like utility bill payments, educational
institutional fees payment, merchant payments, mobile top up, deposits
into savings accounts/schemes with banks/non-bank financial institutions
(NBFIs), loan repayments to banks/non-bank financial institutions
(NBFIs)/non-governmental
organizations-microfinance
institutions
(NGO-MFIs), insurance premium payments to insurance companies and
so forth;






(iii)
Business to Person payments like salary disbursements, dividend/refund
warrant/ discount payments etc.






(iv)
Person to Person payments such as one MFS personal account to another
MFS personal account with the same MFS provider or another MFS
provider as well as the payments from one MFS account to a bank
account and vice versa;






Business to Business payments like vendor payments, supply chain
management payments etc.






(vi)
Online and e-commerce payments;






(vii) Government to Person payments such as pension payments, old age
allowances, freedom-fighter allowances, subsidy payments to farmers and
so forth;






(viii) Person to Government payments such as tax, fee, levy payments, toll
charge, fine etc.






(ix)
Disbursement of inward foreign remittances in accordance with 7.6 of this
regulations;

--- Page 6 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 5 of 12







Loan disbursements to borrowers, vendor payments etc.






(xi)
Other payments approved by the Bangladesh Bank.






5.2
While performing duties as PSP and as authorized agent, the MFS providers will
be under direct supervision of BB‟s Payment Systems Department (PSD).
Whereas, the regulatory compliance of deposit taking, lending and other financial
services in which MFS providers will act as agent, will rest with the principal(s)
that have engaged the MFS providers as their authorized agents.

6.0
Permissible model for MFS providers






6.1
MFS providers in Bangladesh will be led by scheduled commercial banks or
financial institutions licensed by Bangladesh Bank or Government Entity. To
provide MFS in Bangladesh, scheduled commercial banks that are already in
MFS operation are permitted to continue with the existing license or may form a
subsidiary. In case of new applicants, scheduled commercial bank(s) or financial
institution(s) or Government Entity shall have to form a subsidiary. The
scheduled bank(s)/FI(s)/Government Entity interested to form a subsidiary, for
the purpose of providing MFS, shall focus entirely on providing mobile financial
services. In case of a subsidiary following models are permitted:







Subject to the provision of their concerned law/Act, one single
bank/FI/Government Entity, known as the parent bank/FI/ Government
Entity should have at least 51% of the equity of MFS providing
subsidiary. Parent bank/FI/Government Entity will also have majority in
Board of Directors along with controlling share.







(ii)
Subject
to
the provision of their concerned law/Act,
parent
bank/FI/Government Entity may conduct the operation of subsidiary alone
or may take equity partners from the following business entities:








Bank(s), financial institution(s) and Government Entity;








NGOs, investment and fintech companies (local and foreign
incorporated) who have experience of working in financial market
except Mobile Network Operators (MNOs).







(iii)
MFS provider will act as the primary driver of the products and services,
manage customer relationships and distribution channels and mitigate
associated risks.







(iv)
However, any entity whether it is a bank/FI/Government Entity or a non
bank entity, can hold equity in only one MFS providing subsidiary.





6.2
The minimum paid-up capital requirement of a subsidiary model-based MFS
provider is Bangladeshi Taka Forty five (45) Crore. However, the total capital of
a Mobile Financial Services Provider (MFSP) can‟t be less than Bangladeshi
Taka Forty five (45) Crore at any point of its operation. A further cushion of
„capital reserve‟ equal to the amount of paid up capital will have to be built up

--- Page 7 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 6 of 12

from retained earnings, at a rate not less than ten percent (10%) of annual after
tax profits, to mitigate risks. Loss incurring MFS providers must be required to
inject additional capital to maintain the minimum paid up capital requirement.
However, in any case, parent bank/FI/Government Entity has to maintain at least
51% of the equity capital.

Bangladesh Bank may determine additional capital requirement for an existing or
new MFSP depending on the scale of its operation and risk. If so, the MFSP must
be required to maintain the capital in its business. Failure to maintain required
capital will be subject to penalty imposed by Bangladesh Bank as it deems fit or
cancellation of license.

7.0
Approval of application, commencement of business, operational modalities for
MFS providers:






7.1
Scheduled banks, already running MFS operations (with approval of BB)
may continue with their existing structure. Scheduled banks, already
running MFS operations (with approval of BB) which are interested in
forming subsidiary, shall restructure their MFS units as subsidiary
company exclusively as MFS providing PSPs, in terms of Regulation 6 of
these regulations. More than one scheduled banks, already in MFS
operations, cancelling their individual license, may also form a subsidiary
setting up one of the banks as parent bank.







(ii)
Scheduled banks/FIs/Government Entity having no MFS operations of
their own may join any of the running MFS providing subsidiaries by
acquiring equity therein. Besides, two or more scheduled commercial
banks/FIs/Government Entities may jointly form a new MFS (with or
without non-bank equity participants to begin with) setting up one of the
banks/FIs/Government Entities as a parent bank/FI/Government Entity
and seek BB‟s approval to provide mobile financial services.






7.2
All applicants complying with Regulation No. 5 of Bangladesh Payment and
Settlement Systems Regulations, 2014 or any other law(s) shall come into effect
regarding this regulations, will apply to BB‟s PSD with the following documents:







Details of the services proposed to be offered with tentative
implementation schedule.







(ii)
Applicant‟s assessment of risks associated with the proposed delivery
models for each such service, explanation of mitigation and management
of the risks.






7.3
For new MFS applicants, approval will be provided in two phases. At the first
phase, no objection certificate (NOC) will be granted to set up the infrastructure.
At the second phase, license will be issued to commence the operation. Before
launching proposed service, MFS provider will have to seek permission for
commencement of business from BB‟s PSD, within one year of getting NOC for
setting up a MFS infrastructure, with the following documents:

--- Page 8 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 7 of 12



MOU(s) with MNOs and other technology partners, specimen of Service
Level Agreements (SLA) to be entered into with intermediaries in the
service delivery chains, including the distributors/super agents and field
level retail agents;






(ii)
Lists of names and field level locations of retail agent outlets/cash points
(to be) appointed by the MFS provider, to be updated subsequently on
regular monthly basis;







(iii)
MOU with the settlement bank(s);







(iv)
Other documents (as required by BB).






7.4
Transactions in MFS will be conducted only through non-cheque limited
purpose accounts termed "MFS Accounts" in name of customers,
accessible with bearer‟s mobile phone or through alternative digital
process or device by ensuring authenticity of the transaction.







(ii)
Minor beneficiary entitled with government/other approved facility
through MFS may get the benefit primarily through his/her mother‟s MFS
account. Where necessary s/he may get the benefit through his/her father‟s
or legal guardian‟s MFS account.







(iii)
Opening of MFS accounts in names of individual, business and other
entity will however require complete observance of KYC and CDD drills
as prescribed by competent authority from time to time. Opening of MFS
accounts in names of service delivery intermediary at wholesale and retail
levels (distributors, super agents, agents, merchants etc.) will likewise
require complete observance of KYC and CDD drills as prescribed by
competent authority from time to time.






7.5
Aggregate of e-money balances in all MFS accounts of an MFS provider
must at the end of the day be in agreement with or be less than the total
real cash balances in nominated trust cum settlement accounts of the MFS
provider with scheduled commercial bank(s) and invested amount in
Government Securities. No loan is permissible against the Trust Fund
and/or any other instruments that are derived from the Trust Fund. This
shall be monitored by the MFS providers on daily basis and any shortfall
shall be immediately reported to the Payment Systems Department,
Bangladesh Bank. Banks holding trust funds of the MFS providers are
supposed to be entitled with the role of a custodian. The MFS providers
may, if necessary, choose other scheduled commercial bank(s) to be their
custodian of trust fund which is subject to prior approval from PSD of
BB. Balances and transactions at the custodian end must at all times
remain separate from and never be co-mingled with other operational
accounts of the MFS providers.







(ii)
a) Bank(s) providing mobile financial services without forming a
subsidiary but MFS account holders are not under deposit insurance
coverage of Bangladesh Bank; b) MFS provider under subsidiary model-
need to maintain the balance of all MFS account in trust cum settlement

--- Page 9 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 8 of 12

account and need to invest not less than 25% of the physical cash balance
in Government Securities on the basis of calculation on the last working
day of June and December each year. Remaining cash balance has to be
kept with settlement bank(s).






(iii)
Bank(s) providing mobile financial services without forming a subsidiary
and MFS account holders are under deposit insurance coverage of
Bangladesh Bank, will be waived from investing in Government
Securities.






7.6
MFS providers will handle foreign inward remittances only if received through
credits in Nostro Accounts of scheduled commercial banks in Bangladesh and
pay out the same only in Bangladeshi Taka (BDT) to MFS accounts of the
beneficiaries. No outward or cross-border payment transactions shall be
undertaken by MFS providers, as these can only be handled by the AD branches
of scheduled banks in Bangladesh.






7.7
MFS providers are strictly prohibited to engage in taking deposit and lending
from their own funds.






7.8
MFS account holders are free to mobilize balances of their MFS accounts to their
deposit accounts with scheduled commercial banks and MFS providers will act
immediately on request of customers for transferring balances from their MFS
accounts to their deposit accounts with scheduled commercial banks.






7.9
MFS providers will draw up annual accounts and financial statements in
accordance with prevailing accounting and reporting standards and submit the
ones duly audited by reputed audit firm(s) to PSD of BB within 3(three) months
after the end of the accounting year.





8.0
Suspension and cancellation of MFS providers by BB






BB reserves the right of withholding, suspending and cancelling its approval for
operation of an MFS provider, if BB deems actions of the accused MFS to be detrimental
to public interest. Moreover, BB will take appropriate steps towards protecting legitimate
interests of the MFS account holders and other stakeholders of the accused MFS
provider.





9.0
Schedule of Charges






The rate of charges realizable from various financial services offered by the MFS
providers to their clients shall be set in a competitive, non-collusive manner. Besides,
keeping BB‟s PSD fully apprised of all rate settings and rate revisions, MFS providers
will ensure prominent display of the rates of charges in all their retail agent outlets to
inform all customers. Information about all products with schedule of charges should
also be available for all stakeholders in the customer care centers and websites of MFS
providers.

--- Page 10 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 9 of 12

10.0 Distribution Channel






10.1
MFS shall appoint distributors/super agents under contract adhering to the
existing law according to clear and well-documented selection policies
and procedures reported to BB‟s PSD and shall have clear description of
roles and responsibilities of both parties in all relevant aspects. MFS
providers may install retail service outlets or appoint delivery agents
under contracts adhering to the existing law according to clearly stated
roles and responsibilities including business hours for the service outlets,
required standards of customer services, rates of commission/fee payable
to agents, transaction reporting routines, authorizations for signing,
customer interest protection, dispute resolution and settlement and so
forth.







(ii)
Agents are only allowed to take part in 'cash-in' (i.e. converting physical
money to e-money), 'cash-out' (i.e. converting e-money to physical
money) and other transaction(s) approved by Bangladesh Bank. To do the
'cash-in' and 'cash-out' customers may need to show valid identity to
agents. Any transfer transactions involving third party MFS accounts at
the sending or receiving end are prohibited. MFS providers will have to
sensitize the agents properly about AML/CFT risks inherent in their
transactions and also to monitor transaction patterns carefully towards
identifying possible unauthorized/suspicious transaction activities.






10.2
Entities with extensive networks of service delivery outlets, such as NGO-MFIs,
MNOs and Government‟s Postal Department etc. will inter alia be eligible for
engagement as distributors/super agents/retail agents and field level service
delivery agents. Agreements with such distributors/super agents/retail agents
should include reporting clauses requiring full visibility of transactions of the
agent network as well as at individual service outlet level as and when necessary.
An agreement with a network already in agency relationship with other MFS
providers should include clause requiring clear separation of transactions handled
for each MFS provider, avoiding any co-mingling of the e-money of different
MFS providers. The distributors/super agents like NGOs, MNOs, and
Government‟s Postal Department etc. will be able to operate in any geographical
location in Bangladesh. However, individual (a person) distributors/super agents
are bound to work in a certain limited geographical boundary.






10.3
Criteria of selecting partners and agents by MFS providers should inter alia
include:







Inclusivity of Distributors/super agents and Agents;







(ii)
Technical competence for and track record of the intended role;







(iii)
Financial soundness, business reputation and no record of bankruptcy;







(iv)
Standards of security and internal control, audit coverage, monitoring and
reporting;







Capability of meeting commitments under adverse conditions;

--- Page 11 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 10 of 12








(vi)
A self declaration that partners and agents do not have a past criminal
record.





11.0 AML/CFT and KYC compliance:






11.1
MFS providers shall comply with the provisions of existing Money Laundering
Prevention Act, Anti Terrorism Act and respective Rules issued therein under,
instructions and guidelines issued by Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit
(BFIU) from time to time.






11.2
MFS providers shall remain responsible for authenticity and timely updating of
the KYC records as per the instructions of BFIU as and when required.





12.0 Processes to be followed in ensuring authentication of MFS transactions and
security






12.1
MFS providers shall follow the ICT Act, 2006 (amended in 2013) and the
Guidelines on ICT Security for Scheduled Banks and Financial Institutions, 2010
issued by BB, in addressing ICT security issues in respect of MFS.






12.2
The following properties need to be addressed fully in offering a secure
infrastructure for financial transactions using mobile technology:







Confidentiality: Property ensuring that transaction information cannot be
viewed by unauthorized persons.







(ii)
Integrity: Property ensuring that the transaction information remains
intact during transmission and cannot be altered.







(iii)
Authorization: Property ensuring that the authentic user has proper
permission to perform the particular transaction. It ensures how the
system decides what the users can do.







(iv)
Non-repudiation: Property that the particular transaction initiated by a
user cannot be denied by him/her later.






12.3
All transactions must be authenticated by the account holders using their
respective Personal Identification Numbers (PINs) or similar other secured
mechanism. MFS providers should ensure that proper protection and security
features are maintained in issuing and authenticating the PINs and other secured
mechanisms.






12.4
MFS providers shall ensure that proper process is in place for identifying
customers while the service is being enabled/executed. Besides the PIN, a
suitably chosen second authentication factor would be encouraged to add as an
additional security.

--- Page 12 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 11 of 12

13.0 Interoperability






13.1
MFS providers shall encourage linking of the MFS accounts of customers with
their existing or new accounts in banks; maximizing access of customers‟ credit,
deposit and other financial services through the MFS accounts. MFS providers
shall cooperate and work together in promoting interoperability among the
providers towards ensuring widest possible access for customers.


13.2
The MFS providers shall design their systems and procedures such that all MFS
providers are capable of providing fund transfer service in a completely
interoperable way which may include fund transfer from one personal MFS
account to another MFS account with the same MFS provider or another MFS
provider as well as the payments from one personal MFS account to a bank
account with the same bank or another bank and vice versa.





14.0 Risk management and internal controls






14.1
For effective management and containment of the substantial operational risks in
providing Mobile Financial Services, the MFS providers shall put in place robust
internal governance frameworks with internal control and compliance processes
featuring clear description of roles, responsibilities and accountabilities.






14.2
Internal control and compliance processes of MFS providers shall include
oversight routines on operations of wholesale and field level retail agents and on
customer satisfaction levels.





15.0 Customer, Employee, Agent, Distributor/Super Agent education and awareness






MFS providers shall develop and pursue sustainable programs for continual heightening
of awareness and knowledge about various aspects of Mobile Financial Services among
their employees, agents, distributors/super agents and target customer segments to
enhance financial literacy and combat against fraud and forgery.





16.0 Regulatory oversight






16.1
MFS providers will be under off-site and on-site supervisions of Payment
Systems Department, BB, firstly as PSPs extending mobile financial services and
secondly as agents of banks and financial institutions in offering mobile
phone-based banking and other financial services.






16.2
MFS providers shall have to follow rules, regulations, guidelines and instructions
issued by Bangladesh Bank from time to time.






16.3
MFS providers shall submit to BB all required statements and information in
such formats as prescribed by Bangladesh Bank from time to time.





17.0 Complaint and Grievance Redressal






17.1
BB‟s Payment Systems Department (PSD) and Financial Integrity and Customer
Services Department (FICSD) will oversee customer complaints redressal
performance of the MFS providers.

--- Page 13 ---
Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services (MFS) Regulations, 2022

Page 12 of 12







17.2
MFS providers shall put in place processes and procedures for prompt handling
and redressal of customer complaints and grievances; readily accessible through
website and other appropriate information medium.




17.3
The MFS Provider shall maintain a call centre to receive and process disputes 24
hours a day via telephone, SMS, IVR and mail. Each of the disputes received by
the centre must be resolved within ten (10) working days. The MFS provider
shall ensure that they are sufficiently equipped to keep track/log of all disputes
and review status of each dispute and redressal of the same within stipulated
time.






17.4
MFS Customers may have also access to services being provided by Customers
Interest Protection Centre (CIPC) of Bangladesh Bank. The aggrieved customer
can lodge complaints with CIPC of Bangladesh Bank.






17.5
Dispute at distributors/super agents‟ end will be settled according to the
agreement between MFS provider and distributors/super agents. Agent
complaints and grievances will be handled by distributors/super agents in the
primary level and by MFS providers at secondary level.






17.6
Information materials clearly explaining the roles, responsibilities, risks and
liabilities of all parties involved in MFS transactions should be kept readily
accessible to all relevant parties.





18.0 Record retention






18.1
KYC, CDD records on Mobile Account holders, wholesale and Retail
agents of MFS providers and those of MFS transactions shall be retained for not
less than 06 (six) years from the dates of origination, readily reproducible for
later references as needed by the MFS providers themselves or by the regulatory
and law enforcement authorities.






18.2
MFS providers shall also provide print-outs or copies of relevant transaction
records in specific MFS transactions, at the request of the customers or their
counterparts MFS providers/banks/FIs/Government Entity etc. within the
prescribed preservation periods.










-- End --