--- Page 1 ---
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
Statistics Department

Statistics Department Circular No.–06/2014 Dated:
ୈୣୡୣ୫ୠୣ୰ ଶଵ,ଶ଴ଵସ
୔୭୳ୱ୦ ଴଻,ଵସଶଵ

Managing Director/ CEO
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,


Regarding Master Circular on Reporting Money and Banking Related
Returns including SBS-1, SBS-2 & SBS-3

As per requirement of Bangladesh Bank Order 1972, Section No. 36(3), all Scheduled
Banks are advised to carry out the following instructions for submission of error free returns
within stipulated time to Statistics Department of Bangladesh Bank:
1) The statement of Asset and Liability of the Banks must be submitted by 25th of the
following month in respective RIT related to SBS-1 returns (through BB Web Portal)
on monthly basis. It is mentioned that, SBS-1 statement of OBU has also to be
submitted following the same procedure within aforesaid time limit.
2) The statement of Government Deposits and Government Borrowings has to be
submitted within 7th of the following month in respective RIT related to
Supplementary Information on SBS-1 returns on monthly basis.
3) The statement on Break-up of Bills and Bonds has to be submitted by 10th of the
following month in RIT relevant to Bangladesh Government Treasury Bills and Bonds
on monthly basis.
4) The statement of E-banking and E-commerce has to be submitted by 15th of the
following month in respective RIT on monthly basis.
5) The statement of Interest Rates of NFCD has to be submitted by 10th of the following
month in respective RIT on monthly basis.
6) The statement of Profit Paid to Mudaraba Deposits of Islami Shariah based Banks
has to be submitted in respective RIT within 10 (ten) days after finalizing their annual
Report.
7) The statement of Income, Expenditure and Profitability has to be submitted in
respective RIT within 10 (ten) days after finalizing their annual Report.

--- Page 2 ---
8) Quarterly SBS-2 (Deposits & Withdrawals) and SBS-3 (Advances & Bills) returns
must be submitted by 20th of the following month of the quarter.
9) As per 5th edition of the “ Guidelines to fill in the Banking Statistics Returns SBS-1,
SBS-2 & SBS-3”, SBS-2 & SBS-3 Reporting Form (Chapter: 10, Page: 145-146) has
to be preserved along with the Account Opening Form (KYC). At the same time, all
KYC Forms of all old Accounts as well as SBS-2 & SBS-3 Reporting Form have to
be updated within next six months following the above-mentioned Guidelines.
Enclosure of the information in the KYC Form should be mandatory.
10) Quarterly SBS-3.1 (Advances Classified by Economic Purposes) and SBS-3.2
(Advances Classified by Sectors) returns must be uploaded by 30th of the following
month of the quarter as per respective RIT through BB Web Portal.
11) Monthly statement of Interest Rates on Deposits and Advances must be uploaded
by 15th of the following month as per respective RIT through BB Web Portal.
12) In order to submit returns of New Branches to Bangladesh Bank, Banks have to
apply for allocation of Branch Code within 7 (seven) working days of operational
inauguration.
13) List of Reporting Bank Branches as on 31st December has to be submitted annually
by 10th of January following Annexure-A (Chapter: 10, Page: 151) of the said
Guidelines.
14) If the last submission day is a public holiday, the said return must be submitted in
the following working day.
15) Necessary steps should be taken to submit flawless statements by the experienced
Officials working both in Branches and Head Office.

It can be reminded that there is a provision of penalty for both delay and incorrect
submission of the said returns as per Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972, Section No.
36(6) and 36(7) respectively.

Please acknowledge the receipt and circulate this to the concerned officials.
Sincerely yours

Sd/-
(Md. Abdul Bari)
General Manager
Phone: 7120339