--- Page 1 ---
website: www.bb.org.bd

ডিপার্টমেন্ট অব অফ-সাইট সুপারভিশন
বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক
প্রধান কার্যালয়
ঢাকা।
২৬ বৈশাখ, ১৪২৪
ডিওএস সার্কুলার লেটার নং- ১০ তারিখ ৪ ---_-..-.---২২
০৯ মে, ২০১৭

প্রধান নির্বাহী/ব্যবস্থাপনা পরিচালক
বাংলাদেশে কার্ধরত সকল তফসিলি ব্যাংক

উপর্যুক্ত বিষয়ে এ ডিপার্টমেন্টের ডিওএস সার্কুলার লেটার নং- ১৭, তারিখ ৭ নভেম্বর, ২০১২ এর প্রতি
দৃষ্টি আকর্ষণ করা যাচ্ছে।

২। উক্ত সার্কুলার লেটারের মাধ্যমে ব্যাংকগুলোর জালিয়াতি/প্রতারণামূলক তৎপরতার প্রবণতা প্রতিরোধে
অভ্যন্তরীণ নিয়ন্ত্রণ ব্যবস্থাদির কার্ষকারিতার স্বমূল্যায়ন সংক্রান্ত প্রতিবেদন ব্যাংকের প্রধান নির্বাহীর স্বাক্ষরে এবং পর্ষদের
অডিট কমিটির চেয়ারম্যানের প্রতিস্বাক্ষরে প্রতি ত্রেমাস অন্তে পরবর্তী এক মাসের মধ্যে এ বিভাগে দাখিল করার নির্দেশনা
দেয়া হয়েছিল

৩। এক্ষণে, ব্যাংক ব্যবসার সাথে সম্পৃক্ত ঝুঁকিসমূহ-হাস এবং জাল-জালিয়াতি/প্রতারণামূলক কার্যক্রম অধিকতর
কার্ষকর ও ফলপ্রসৃভাবে প্রতিরোধের লক্ষ্যে উল্লিখিত প্রতিবেদনটিতে প্রয়োজনীয় সংশোধনী আনা হয়েছে। অভ্যন্তরীণ
নিয়ন্ত্রণ ব্যবস্থাদির সংশোধিত প্রতিবেদন ye ছক মোতাবেক) যথাযথভাবে অনুসরণ/পরিপালন করার জন্য
আপনাদেরকে নির্দেশনা প্রদান করা হলো |

৪। এখন হতে স্বমূল্যায়ন প্রতিবেদন ব্যাংকের অভ্যন্তরীণ নিয়ন্ত্রণ ও পরিপালন বিভাগ কর্তৃক প্রস্ততপূর্বক ব্রৈমাসের
পরিবর্তে অর্ধবার্ষিক ভিত্তিতে (প্রতি অর্ধবার্ষিক শেষে পরবর্তী এক মাসের মধ্যে) এ ডিপার্টমেন্টে দাখিল করতে হবে । এ
নির্দেশনা জুন, ২০১৭ হতে কার্যকর হবে | MOMS, ৭ নভেম্বর, ২০১২ তারিখের ডিওএস সার্কুলার লেটার নং- ১৭ এ
প্রদত্ত অন্যান্য নির্দেশনা অপরিবর্তিত থাকবে |

অনুগ্রহপূর্বক প্রাপ্তি স্বীকার করবেন।
আপনাদের বিশ্বস্ত,
সতযুক্তিঃ ১০(দশ) পৃষ্ঠা | স্বা-
(এস, এম, রবিউল হাসান)
মহাব্যবস্থাপক

ফোন 8 ৯৫৩০০৯৩

--- Page 2 ---
Declaration form

Date :

To : General Manager
Department of Off‐site Supervision
Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka

Reporting period:

Sub: Self-Assessment of Anti-Fraud Internal Controls.

Dear Sir,

I would like to confirm you in terms of your DOS circular letter no. 10 dated
09‐05‐2017 that the annexed self‐assessment of anti‐fraud internal controls has been
carried out with due diligence for identifying the drawbacks of our Internal Control and
Compliance System and taking appropriate measures to make it more effective and
strong. The position of our bank’s internal control practices has been reflected truly and
faithfully through the information provided in this report.

Sincerely Yours,


Signature and date:
(Name :‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐)
Managing Director/CEO)

Counter signature and date
(Name:‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐)
Chairman, Audit Committee of the
Board of Directors


N.B: In case of foreign banks, declaration form must be signed both by CEO and Head of
ICC/Internal Audit.

--- Page 3 ---
Page 1 of 7



Self-Assessment of Anti-Fraud Internal Controls

Sl.
No.
Particulars
Yes
No Partial*
Remarks**
(if any)

Internal Control & Compliance(ICC)




01
Does the senior management ensure communication of different
prudential regulations, policies etc. issued time to time by bank itself,
regulator and government throughout the bank?




02
Does the Audit Committee (AC) review the audit findings and
compliance status at least on quarterly basis and take actions
accordingly? If yes, attach the related memo.




03
Policy and structure of ICCD




a) Has the bank reviewed its own ICC guidelines in light of
guidelines issued by BB and continued to review on yearly basis?




b) Is
the
organogram
structure
of
the
ICCD
in
accordance/conformity with those prescribed in the ICC
guidelines by BB?




c) Does the ICC Department have adequate manpower with
professional knowledge, banking experience etc. to conduct
audit activities as required by the bank?




d) Is the bank’s Internal Audit Department well equipped with IT
people to conduct audit in IT environment?




e) Does the work scope of the ICCD cover all the issues of Charter
narrated in the ICC Guidelines?




f) Does the bank update Fraud Management Policy, Audit Manual
etc. every year?




g) Has the Fraud Management Policy been implemented in case of
settlement of detected fraud‐forgeries?




h) Does the bank have a central database/corporate memory of
fraud‐forgeries1 occurred in the bank?




04
Has the bank complied with the instructions of Guidelines on Internal
Control & Compliance in Banks regarding preparation and submission
of report on its own health?




05
Is the overall effectiveness of the internal control system, policies &
procedures of the bank evaluated at least annually by the proper
authority with the approval of the board to prevent recurrence of the
material irregularities/fraud/forgeries and also to address the
changing environment?




06
Were there any incidents of fraud/forgery published in the media but
the ICCD failed to detect?




07
a) Does the Monitoring Unit review Quarterly Operations
Report (QOR), Loan Documentation Checklist (LDCL) etc.
effectively to monitor the operational performance of the
branches?




b) Is the DCFCL (Departmental Control Function Checklist)
reviewed by Departmental Managers, Line Managers, and
Branch Managers at the prescribed frequencies?




* At least 50% implemented items are to be answered in ‘Partial’ column.
** ‘Remarks’ column is to be filled up with the actual percentage of implementation for ‘Partial’ answers, time limit for full implementation of partial and unimplemented items and
any other related information bank desires to include.
1 Material losses for banks due to creation of fake loan accounts, defalcation of money, unauthorized fund transfer from one account to another, fake issuance of PO, DD, credit
card, debit card etc., Embezzlement of money by forged cheque, cash embezzlement through online transaction, defalcation of money by creating fraud overdraft, amount
received from depositor but not deposited to a/c, unauthorized withdrawal from suspense a/c, forged FX document etc.

(Signature)
(Signature)
Initiating Officer Head of Compliance

--- Page 4 ---
Page 2 of 7



Sl.
No.
Particulars
Yes
No
Partial
Remarks
(if any)
08
Are the employees provided with clear authority/delegation of power
and job description to perform the daily activities of the bank with
proper documentation of hand over and take over charges when
applicable?




09
Does the bank have risk‐based auditing system and ensure its
implementation?




10
Does the ICCD evaluate the degree of risk, at least annually, of every
department/office/branch/subsidiary/foundation/regional office in
addition to regular audit of bank branches?




11
Does the bank have any policy regarding admonitory/reproving
measures for internal auditors in case of their failure in applying due
diligence to the responsibility assigned to them?




12
Are job rotation, transfer, posting and mandatory leave (where
applicable) for the employees strictly followed as per Bangladesh Bank
guidelines?




13
a) Does the bank have centralized system to monitor all deposits and
loan accounts including staff?




b) Does the ICCD ensure monitoring of staff accounts and other
accounts operated by the staff at least on monthly basis through
getting certification from branch manager/regional office in
absence of centralized system?




14
a) Are the senior management assigned with responsibility for
fraud management so that employees of all level get conscious
about prevention and detection of fraud/forgeries?




b) Does the senior management perform their responsibilities
assigned to them properly for minimizing fraud/forgery?




15
Does the bank perform screening of applicants before appointment
particularly to cash handling positions, and other trusted positions
such as treasury, accounts, security and ICT (techniques include
confirmation of qualifications, verification of employment background,
criminal history searches etc.)?





General Banking and Operation




16
Does the account opening branch ensure customers’ address through
cross reference checking and maintain proper records in case of new
accounts?




17
Does the bank restrict the access of persons/belongings (which are not
related to cash) to the cash area to prevent defalcation of cash and
cash equivalents?




18
Does the bank ensure Balance Confirmation for both loan and deposit
accounts to the customer, any way, at least once in every six months?




19
Is there any policy to inform the customers about different charges
debited from their accounts and whether it is implemented?




20
a) Is effective reconciliation of inter branch/General Account in
place and necessary action taken to reconcile the long-pending
(three months and above) items?




b) Does the bank produce monthly reconciliation status to the
senior
management
to
ensure
proper
monitoring
of
reconciliation?




c) Are
reconciliation
activities
of
the
department/division/unit/section audited at least once in a
year?





(Signature) (Signature)

Initiating Officer Head of Compliance

--- Page 5 ---
Page 3 of 7



Sl.
No.
Particulars
Yes
No
Partial
Remarks
(if any)
21
Are the Suspense/Sundry Debtors/Sundry Creditors/Sundry Deposits/
Various Utility Accounts and Development as well as Miscellaneous
Expenses of Head Office and branches duly monitored by ICCD and
placed to monthly meeting of higher management?




22
a) Does the branch maintain proper edit/audit trail signed by the
manager?




b) Does the branch manager check individual employees’ activity
reports (computer posting listings) on daily basis?




23
Does the bank make ageing of inoperative/dormant accounts/
unclaimed deposits/valuable goods and submit the same to BB
following BB circular/guidelines?




24
Has the bank introduced surveillance system that can watch every
single event (access/exit) of all employees of the bank particularly
to/from Cash counters, Dealing room, SWIFT rooms, Server rooms,
Data center, ICT Division etc.?




25
Does the bank maintain security of lockers as per Bangladesh Bank
guidelines?




26
a) Does the bank have adequate security surveillance
measures like CCTV, Alarm System, etc. in locations like
Access point, Vault area, Cash Teller area, ATM booth, etc.?




b) Does the bank record CCTV footages and preserve regular
backup of footages for a minimum period as specified by the
Bangladesh Bank?




c) Are the CCTV DVRs (Digital Video Recorders) placed in a
secured place?




27
Does the bank display Help Desk contact details at all of their ATM
booths, Web portals, Merchant outlets to lodge complaints or seek
assistance?




28
Does the bank:
a) have a code of ethics or similar document in line with National
Integrity Strategy of Bangladesh to guide staff about ethical
standards in their work?




b) provide training on ethical standards to its employees?





Loans and Advances




29
a) Is physical verification conducted by the concerned officials at
borrower’s/guarantor’s office/factory, present & permanent
addresses for ensuring their identification and business location?




b) Is appropriate record of the physical verification maintained for
future reference before disbursement of loan?




30
Does the bank send a one page summary report containing all past due
loans, new facilities provided, written off loans, renewal/rescheduling/
enhancement of loans, capital market investment to senior management
and Board of Directors (to MANCOM in case of foreign banks) on
monthly basis for understanding the current and past performance of
the loans?




31
Are credit facilities availed by the borrower in his own name and /or in
the name of his allied/sister concerns from all other banks & financial
institutions clearly stated in the credit proposal?





(Signature)
(Signature)
Initiating Officer Head of Compliance

--- Page 6 ---
Page 4 of 7




Sl.
No.
Particulars
Yes
No
Partial
Remarks
(if any)
32
a) Are all credit lines under the purview of CRG (Credit Risk
Grading) guidelines and CRG done properly considering all
information including CIB data?




b) Have any credit facilities been provided with an exception to
CRG? If yes, mention the classification status?




33
a) Is the property offered as collateral security against loan
physically verified by the designated official to ensure physical
existence of the property and it’s possession by the proposed
borrower/mortgager?




b) Whether appropriate inspection is conducted by the related
bank officials along with the third party valuation firm to
assess the value of collateral before sanctioning the loan?




c) Does the bank ensure accomplishing ‘tag deed’ on the
collateral already mortgaged with the bank; in case of
providing new facilities?




34
Does the bank ensure proper control and security over credit files and
security documents with proper documentation of hand over and
takeover?




35
Is there any instance of giving unauthorized or fraudulent credit
facilities (including non‐funded) at branch level during the reporting
period?




36
a) Does the bank ensure that Local Bills Purchased/Accepted are
under genuine trade following Bangladesh Bank guidelines?




b) Are bank employees who are authorized to disburse funds
(paying officer) different from employees who process loan
applications/requests (loan officers/under writers)?




c) Are loans disbursed only after complying with all terms and
conditions mentioned in the sanction letters?




d) Does the bank/branch maintain loan documentation checklist
in each loan file following the related sanction letter?




e) Does the bank conduct cross-checking to identify whether the
same borrower has taken loans with different names from other
branches of the bank/other banks?




f) Is the usage of fund ensured by the bank branch/regional office
nearest to borrower’s stated business area in the cases where
loans are disbursed to locations far from the disbursing
branch/office?




g) Is single borrower exposure limit specified by BB followed
before sanction of any credit facility?




37
Does the bank follow prevailing rules & regulations including
provisions of section 27 of BCA 1991 (amended up to 2013) in case of
loan sanctioning to Directors of the bank?




38
Does the bank follow section 26(Ga) of BCA 1991 (amended up to
2013) in case of transaction with persons related with the bank?




39
Is there policy and practice in line with prevailing laws and BB
directions to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing?





Foreign exchange Operation




40
Does the bank lodge the import bills within the time frame under UCP
600?






(Signature)
(Signature)
Initiating Officer Head of Compliance

--- Page 7 ---
Page 5 of 7



Sl.
No.
Particulars
Yes
No
Partial
Remarks
(if any)
41
Does the bank ensure retaining original copy of bill of lading/airway
bill and second copy of LCAF till the adjustment of the extended credit
facilities (PAD/BLC/MIB)?




42
Does the bank ensure keeping 100% margin against issuance of the
shipping guarantee (in case of the original import bill not yet received
by the bank)?




43
a) Is there any instance of extending post import finance
(LTR/MTR etc.) in spite of having overdue LTR facilities?




b) If yes, is it approved by the competent authority?




44
a) Does the bank restructure overdue LTR facilities?




b) Does the bank ensure monitoring the stock of imported goods
with the LTR outstanding?




45
Is there any instance of extending Packing Credit (PC) facilities before
opening of Back to Back L/C?




46
Does the bank extend every IBP facilities only after taking approval
from head office?




47
Does the bank ensure physical delivery of goods and application
of due diligence against extended IBP/ABP facilities (as per
BRPD circular no. 10/2012)?




48
Does the bank ensure genuineness of the export contract/letter of
credit (in accordance with the SWIFT code) before taking lien?




49
Does the bank examine the export documents (especially BL/AWB,
customs certified EXP, Acceptance‐in case of deferred bill) properly to
prevent fraud‐forgeries?




50
a) Does the bank verify the credit worthiness of foreign buyer to
ensure repatriation of export proceeds?




b) Does the bank report un-repatriated export proceeds to BB in
due time?




51
Is there any instance of violation of limits set by the bank for
treasury functions? If yes, mention the number of instances and
amount there against.




52
a) Does the bank ensure reconciliation of Nostro Accounts on
regular basis and report the same to the higher authority?




b) Does the bank have un-reconciled entries for more than 3
months in Nostro Accounts? if yes, is provision maintained
against that?





Information and Communication Technology (ICT)




53
Does the bank have an ‘ICT Security Policy’ in line with BB
guidelines as well as the business objectives?




54
Does the bank review its 'ICT Security Policy' at least once in a year to
cope with the evolving changes in the ICT environment and have it
approved by the Board of Directors?




55
Does
the
bank
carry
out
Information
System
(IS)
audit
(internal/external) at least once a year to find out weaknesses in the
systems and take appropriate measures to mitigate the risks?




56
Does the bank ensure implementation of privileged access control
system to monitor the activities of privileged users like System
Administrators, Database Administrators, Backup Administrators, Key
Business Users, etc.?





(Signature)
(Signature)
Initiating Officer Head of Compliance

--- Page 8 ---
Page 6 of 7


Sl.
No.
Particulars
Yes
No
Partial
Remarks
(if any)
57
Does the bank undertake periodic vulnerability assessment and
penetration testing procedures to find out threats and vulnerabilities
and take relevant remediation?




58
Are there appropriate risk mitigation measures like operating time
schedule for the users, transaction limit, transaction frequency limit,
AML checks, etc. depending on the risk perception, unless otherwise
mandated by the Bangladesh Bank?




59
Has the bank established an incident management process to log all
incidents for proper resolution and future reference and a CERT
(Computer Emergency Response Team) to respond immediately when
necessary?




60
Does the bank have implemented Fraud Management Controls to
prevent online fraudulent transactions from different delivery channels
like ATM, POS, Internet Banking, E‐commerce, Mobile Banking, etc.
based on different business logics like transaction frequency,
transaction geo‐location, transaction pattern, etc.




61
Are the ‘high value’ transactions approved by appropriate personnel
having proper Delegation of Authority (DOA)?




62
Does the system generate daily transaction report for high value
transactions and send it to internal compliance unit?




63
Does the bank have implemented Automated Customer Alerts (SMS,
Email) for any kind of transactions like withdrawal, deposit, transfer,
etc.?




64
Is there any system in place to store and archive Database, Perimeter
and Core Devices, Web Server and Mission Critical Servers log files for
monitoring and pointing out suspicious attempts and activities?




65
Is there any central monitoring system to follow‐up ATM Cash Balance
status, Loading/Unloading activities, ATM disorder and malfunction,
etc.?




66
Is there any established procedure to segregate the Card
personalization, PIN generation, and Card distribution activities?




67
Are the appropriate measures taken to prevent counterfeit and
skimming cards at ATM?




68
Are the appropriate measures taken to prevent Email security threats
like SPAM, Phishing, Spoofing, Flooding, Hoaxes, etc.?




69
Does the bank have implemented dynamic OTP (One‐Time Password)
or Security Token as 2FA (Two Factor Authentication) for online
transactions like Ecommerce, Internet Banking?




70
Has the bank implemented Dual Control System for‐
 SWIFT transactions
 Cash loading/unloading in ATM
 Branch Teller transactions (as per DOA)




71
Is there any practice of accompanying vendor support personnel by
bank’s official while working at sensitive area like Data Center?




72
Is a mechanism in place to encrypt sensitive information in portable
devices like Laptop, External HDD, Tape Drive, etc. and also travelling
through public network?




73
Are all external network connections routed through a Firewall?






(Signature)
(Signature)
Initiating Officer Head of Compliance

--- Page 9 ---
Page 7 of 7




Sl.
No.
Particulars
Yes
No
Partial
Remarks
(if any)
74
Does the bank have technological enforcement to all employees for
changing their passwords periodically as per bank’s ICT Security Policy?




75
Does the bank follow appropriate Procurement Policy for procuring
any kind of IT services like Hardware, Software, Support, Consultation,
etc.?




76
Has the bank taken appropriate measures to accommodate all controls
and practices stated in the guidelines on Core Banking Solution (CBS)
Features and Controls?




77
Does the bank distribute Computers, Laptops and electronic gadgets
to end users from their ICT Division to maintain a set standard of
Hardware configuration and Software installation?




78
Does the bank put restrictions on connecting BYODs (Bring Your Own
Devices) and external devices to bank’s network?





Questions are to be answered using ‘√’ mark in the respective column.
The supporting documents/papers in favor of ‘yes/partial’ answers have to be preserved in the ICC Department
for future reference.



(Signature and seal including name) (Signature and seal including name)
Head of Compliance Head of ICCD

--- Page 10 ---
Bank Name: …………………..
Statement of Fraud and Forgeries detected during reporting period …………………
Confidential





















*In case of no detection of fraud-forgeries, NIL statement has to be submitted.





























Sl.
no.
Type of
fraud

Techniques
applied to
make fraud
Name
of the
Branch
Date of
Amount
involved
Adjustment of the
defrauded amount
(recovered from
concerned
person/write off or
other way)
Name of the
Officers/Employees/
others involved
Action
taken
against the
delinquent
Officers/
Persons
Current
status of the
case
Initiatives taken
to prevent
recurrence of
the incidents
Remarks
Occurrence
Detection
10
11
12
13

--- Page 11 ---
Bank Name: …………………..
Statement of Fraud and Forgeries detected and unsettled up to the previous reporting
period since the inception of the bank

Confidential




*In case of no such fraud-forgeries, NIL statement has to be submitted.












Sl.
no.
Type of
fraud

Techniques
applied to
make fraud
Name
of the
Branch
Date
of
Amount
involved
Adjustment of the
defrauded amount
(recovered from
concerned
person/write off or
other way)
Name of the
Officers/
Employees/others
involved
Action
taken against
the delinquent
Officers/
Persons
Current
status of the
case
Initiatives taken
to prevent
recurrence of the
incidents
Remarks
Occurrence Detection
10
11
12
13