--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bb.org.bd

Department of Financial Institutions and Markets
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

DFIM Circular Letter No-03 Date: 28 January 2014

Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All financial institutions licensed under Financial Institution Act, 1993

Dear Sir,
Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act of the United States
The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) enacted in 2010 in the United
States (U.S.) requires a ‘Foreign Financial Institution (FFI)’ to report to the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) information about certain accounts held by U.S. taxpayers or by foreign
entities in which U.S. taxpayers hold a substantial ownership interest. According to the definition
of FFI, all financial institutions as defined in the Financial Institution Act, 1993 have come
within the provisions of FATCA.
As the Government of Bangladesh has not yet decided to execute an intergovernmental
agreement with the U.S., these obligations can alternatively be discharged at individual financial
institution level by registering and signing ‘Participation Agreements’ with the IRS. The
National Board of Revenue (NBR) also consented on registering with the IRS if a financial
institution has U.S. taxpayer accounts in its books.
Therefore, financial institutions concluding that FATCA may have implications for their
customers and operations should register themselves with the IRS and put in place appropriate
processes and controls to ensure compliance with FATCA. Concerned financial institutions are
advised to visit the IRS’s website, www.irs.gov/fatca-registration, for necessary guidance in this
regard.
Because the agreement requires disclosures which would normally be breaches of the
Financial Institution’s general duty of confidentiality under prevalent Bangladeshi laws and
practices, financial institutions are to obtain written consents from their customers before
reporting the requested information to IRS. Financial Institutions should communicate with the
existing customers well in advance of executing ‘Participation Agreement’ with the IRS enabling
the accountholders to comply with reasonable requests for information or to provide acceptable
documentation to meet the FATCA obligations.
This is for information and guidance.
Yours sincerely,
sd/-
(Md. Shah Alam)
General Manager
Phone: 9530178