--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
Web site: www.bb.org.bd


Circular Letter No. FEPD(A&NFBP)/111/2013-490 Date: April 30, 2013

All Authorized Dealers of
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,

Entry to Special Foreign Currency Account Monitoring System (SFCAMS)
software designated by Bangladesh Bank (BB)

Please refer to Chapter 13 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions (GFET),Vol-I
(2009) wherein Authorized Dealers have been allowed to open Foreign Currency Accounts. Besides that
Bangladesh Bank extends it’s permission arena by allowing Authorized Dealer Banks to open Special
Foreign Currency Account with some stipulated conditions laid down the permission letter.
02. Now it has been decided that all authorized Dealer Branches of Scheduled Banks shall input the
entry of daily transactions to these special foreign currency accounts approved by Foreign Exchange Policy
Department through Special Foreign Currency Account Monitoring System (SFCAMS) software.
Directions to operate the software are stipulated below:
a. Only Authorized Dealer branches engaged in foreign exchange transactions shall have access to
this software.
b. Log in to the software shall be performed from Bangladesh Bank’s website www.bb.org.bd-
services-E-services-SFCAMS.
c. For log in purpose definite user ID and password should be collected from the Foreign Exchange
Policy Department .
d. At the closure of each business day every foreign exchange transaction shall be entered into the
system using the said software.
e. Entry of such accounts approved by Foreign Exchange Policy Department shall be commenced
from 05 May, 2013.
f. For more information contact address is hosneara.nasreen@bb.org.bd
Reporting of all foreign exchange transactions to Foreign Exchange Operation Department shall
remain as usual.
Please bring these instructions to the notice of all concerned.
please acknowledge receipt of it.

Yours faithfully,



(Md. Zakir Hossain Chowdhury)
Deputy General Manager
Phone:9530250