--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
www.bb.org.bd


FE Circular No. 02





Date: January 09, 2013












All Authorized Dealers of
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,

Outward remittance of commission earnings of ‘foreign brokerage firm’
against service rendered to foreign portfolio investors in Bangladesh.

Attention of the Authorized Dealers (ADs) is invited regarding repatriation of commission
earnings of ‘foreign stock brokerage firms’ abroad against service rendered to foreign portfolio
investors for investment in Bangladesh.

02. It has been observed that local stock brokerage firms may be involved on behalf of
foreign stock brokerage firms (registered and operating abroad) to aid foreign portfolio investors for
trading of securities through Non-resident Investors Taka Accounts(NITAs) in Bangladesh and earn
commissions/service charges through dealings of securities of such foreign investors. Such
commission earnings, etc. need to be shared between the brokerage firms in both ends.

03. In order to facilitate timely repatriation of share of commission earnings etc. of foreign
stock brokerage firms from Bangladesh, it has been decided that local firms can remit such share of
commission earnings to their foreign counterpart brokerage firms through aurhorised dealer banks
without prior approval of Bangladesh Bank subject to observance of the following stipulations:
a. The local brokerage firm (agent) has to obtain permission from Foreign Exchange Investment
Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office or from concerned Office of Bangladesh Bank to work
on behalf of foreign brokerage firm (principal) under Section 18A of the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, 1947. For obtaining such permission, local brokerage firm needs to apply to
Bangladesh Bank (Foreign Exchange Investment Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office or
concern Office of Bangladesh Bank) for necessary permission with documents/information as
mentioned in Annexure-FBC-1.
b. Only commission/service charge earned from trading of securities of the foreign investors through
BO Account opened with the concerned brokerage firm and NITAs (opened with any AD) shall be
considered for sharing with the foreign brokerage firm after deduction of taxes and other items (if
any) for subsequent remittance to abroad in accordance with the agreement signed between the two
parties.












Page-2

--- Page 2 ---
-02-

c. Local brokerage firm (agent) having permission from Bangladesh Bank under 18A of the FERA,
1947 shall request the AD for the purpose of remittance to foreign brokerage firm (principal) abroad.
Commission/service charge payable to the foreign stock brokerage firm shall be determined on
monthly basis by deducting from gross commissions/service charges (i) the local agent's
commission/service charges, (ii) taxes payable on earnings/service charges as applicable and (iii)
other expenses including audit fees as per statement in Annexure- FBC-2 in accordance with the
agreement signed between the two parties. The statement must be certified by the auditor of the
agent. Supporting documents should contain information relating to transaction volume against stock
trading on behalf of non-resident portfolio investors, amount of commission/service charge earned
and the amount payable to the principal on account of commission/service charge.
Commission/service charge earned in one month may be remitted in any subsequent month.
d. Applications to AD should be accompanied by invoices raised by the brokerage firm abroad for
the claimed amount.
e. Effecting remittance, the AD shall report the transaction alongwith TM form, Annexure - FBC-2
and supporting documents with usual monthly returns to the Foreign Exchange Operation
Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office/concerned Office of Bangladesh Bank following the
month of remittance. Besides, consolidated information about remittance of commission earnings
shall have to be reported to Foreign Exchange Investment Department, Head Office/ concerned
Office of Bangladesh Bank on half yearly basis ( Jan-June information to be submitted by next
August and July-Dec information to be submitted by next February) in the format in Annexure-
FBC-3 for post facto checking.
f. Local brokerage firms who have already earned such commissions through dealing of securities of
foreign portfolio investors in collaboration with foreign brokerage firms may remit outstanding
remittable commission of the previous months (calculated as per above instructions) after getting
permission under 18A of the FERA, 1947 from Bangladesh Bank using one consolidated FBC-2.

Please bring these instructions to the notice of all concerned.

Yours faithfully,

(Mohammad Zakir Hossain Chowdhury)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 9530250

--- Page 3 ---
Annexure: FBC-1
(FE Circular No. 02, dated 09 Jan, 2013).

1. Application of the local brokerage firm in the letter head pad addressing to the head of
concerned department/office of the Bangladesh Bank;
2. Form Annexure-II [Appendix 6/3, GFET 2009(Vol-1)] duly filled in;
3. Agreement with foreign principal(s) specifying description of the services under the contract,
calculation/ratio of sharing of commission etc. between the parties, charges(if any)to be
deducted from the commission earnings, signing and expiry date of the agreement, termination
of contract, renewal of the contract, etc.;
4. Updated Trade License, membership license of the Central Depository, Bangladesh Ltd (CDBL),
membership license of stock exchange(s), permission of the Bangladesh Securities and
Exchange Commission to work as stock broker;
5. Attested Copy of TIN;
6. Bank Solvency Certificate;
7. Partnership deed (for partnership firms);
8. Certificate of Incorporation, Articles of Association, Memorandum of Association ( for companies)
VAT Registration Certificate (optional).

--- Page 4 ---
Annexure: FBC-2
(FE Circular No. 02, dated 09 Jan, 2013).

Name of the AD…………………………Bank…………………………….Branch
Statement showing commission/service charges payable to foreign stock brokerage firm
(principal) abroad and settled thereagainst during the month of ………………….., ………..20
Name of Local Brokerage Firm (Agent):
Name of Foreign Brokerage Firm(Principal):
Bangladesh Bank's Permission No……………………………, Date:………………..
Sl.
No.
Name of
Portfolio
Investors
NITA
No.
Bank Name
and Branch
BO
A/c
No.
Gross
commission /
service
charges
earned
Distribution of
commission earnings
(Col 6)
Deductions from earnings
of Principal ( col 8)
Net Amount Remittable
(BDT)

Agent
Principal
Taxes
Others
10

11 = 8-9-10










BDT
USD
















Total












12. Add: Outstanding as per last statement






13. Net Amount remittable






14. Less: Amount remitted during the month






15. Net outstanding amount


We do hereby certify that the above information is correct. We also certify that taxes, VAT, etc. applicable
to commission earnings have been deducted accordingly. We do hereby undertake that in the event of any
excess amount of foreign exchange remitted to the foreign principal, the amount remitted as such in excess
of the actual entitlement, will be repatriated/adjusted to Bangladesh immediately on demand by the
Authorized Dealer/Bangladesh Bank or any other competent authority.


Signature with date and stamp of the authorized official
of the local stock brokerage firm with full name and
designation.
Signature with date and stamp of the
authorized official of the AD bank with full
name and designation.

Encl. Attested copy of transaction statements of investors

Certificate from the Auditor
Certified that the particulars furnished above truly represent the status of remittable amount to
principal abroad.

Place:
Signature :
Date:
Status

Name of the audit firm :

--- Page 5 ---
Annexure: FBC-3
(FE Circular No. 02, dated 09 Jan, 2013).


Name of the AD…………………………Bank…………………………….Branch

Half yearly consolidated statement showing commission/service charges payable
to foreign stock brokerage firm (principal abroad) and settled thereagainst
during the period of …………………..,
Name of Local Brokerage Firm (Agent):
Name of Foreign Brokerage Firm(Principal):
Bangladesh Bank's Permission No……………………………, Date:………………..











Particulars
Amount in
BDT
Amount in
USD
Share of commission earnings earned during the reporting period (Net as per
summation of FBC-2 of the period)


Add : Outstanding as per last statement


Net amount remittable


Less : Remittance effected during the reporting period (as per FBC-2)


Net outstanding amount (as per last FBC-2)





Signature with date and stamp of the authorized official of the
local stock brokerage firm with full name, designation.

Signature with date and stamp of the authorized
official of the AD bank with full name, designation.


Encl.: Copies of FBC-2 and TM Forms submitted during the period.