--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
Web site: www.bangladeshbank.org.bd


FE Circular Letter No. 22





Date: 17 July, 2013


Head Office/Principal Office
of all Authorized Dealers of
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,

Calculation of Daily Exchange Position: Outward Bill Purchased

Attention of the Authorized Dealers (ADs) is invited to the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions (GFET), Vol.‐2 (Edition‐2010), paragraph 22, Chapter 2, Sl. No. 1.A. id (Outward bill
purchased) of the Appendix 48A and 48B regarding calculation of 'daily exchange position' of
authorized dealers.


For better understating of calculation of daily exchange position, it is clarified that the
existing text of the said paragraph and the related title under the above mentioned serial numbers
of Appendices 48A and 48B shall be replaced as follows:

1.A.id: Foreign currency bills purchased

Banks have different methods of entries for foreign and inland bills purchased which are
denominated as well as receivable in foreign currency against direct/deemed exports. If a bank
inputs the value of any such bill purchased immediately into their currency account, then such
transaction need not be reported under this head. On the other hand, some banks debit their bills
purchased to a temporary suspense account and transfer to their currency account when the bill is
realized. When the exchange position is prepared before realization of the bill(s), the total
outstanding purchased export bill (foreign and inland denominated as well as receivable in foreign
currency) should be reported under this head. Moreover, any outstanding payment liability in
foreign currency (if any) against such purchased bills are to be deducted while reporting under the
said head. After realization of bills, such transactions are to be reported in local book and the
respective head will be adjusted accordingly. The amount of bills sent for collection shall not be
reported under this head.

Other instructions of to paragraph 22, Chapter 2 of GFET, Vol.‐2 (Edition‐2010) will remain
unchanged.

Please bring the contents of this circular letter to the notice of all concerned.



Yours faithfully,

(Md. Abdul Mannan)
Deputy General Manager
Phone : 9530319