--- Page 1 ---
Project Implementation Unit
COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response Facility Project
(AIIB Loan No. L0415A)
SME & Special Programmes Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd


SMESPD Circular Letter No. 03




Dated : 16 February, 2023



Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer
All Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh
Head Office, Dhaka.

Additional Refinance fund for COVID-19 affected Cottage, Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (CMSME) sector under “COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response Facility
Project (CECRFP, L0415-A)’ funded by Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB)

Please refer to the SMESPD Circular No. 06, dated June 23, 2021.
02. In order to mitigate the adverse effects of Covid-19 and also to revive the economic
activities, the Government of Bangladesh announced a financial stimulus package of BDT 200
billion in 2020 so as to increase the flow of credit/investment in the CMSME sector of the
country. To implement this stimulus package, necessary instructions/guidelines have been issued
through SMESPD Circular No. 01, dated April 13, 2020 and revised SMESPD Circular No. 09,
dated September 09, 2021. In this regard, a revolving refinance scheme amounting BDT 100
billion was introduced from the Bangladesh Bank’s own source through SMESPD Circular No.
02, dated April 26, 2020. Under the said scheme, participating banks and financial institutions
(PFIs) are availing refinance facility up to 50 percent of their lending.
03. With a view to support credit expansion and liquidity constraints of CMSMEs brought
on by the COVID-19, another refinance scheme titled as “COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis
Response Facility Project (CECRFP)” is being implemented by Bangladesh Bank with the
financial support from Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB). Under this Project, the PFIs
are availing additional refinance up to 50 percent of their lending against working capital
loans/investment only.
04. Now, to make the fund available for renovation and decoration of existing
infrastructure and purchase of short to mid-term asset for the CMSEs, it has been decided to
extend the refinance facility to the PFIs against term loan/investment up to three years to CMSEs
from the date of SMESPD Circular No. 09/2021 (i.e. September. 09, 2021); however the
refinanced amount will be realized after 1 (one) year from the date of refinance along with
applicable interest/profit/ charges. In this regard, instructions contained in serial no. 2 (e), (h) and
(k) of SMESPD Circular No. 06/2021 will be replaced/modified by the following:
2. e)
Interest/Profit Rate: The interest/profit rate will be 4% (four percent) for
refinancing loan/investment, which will be charged at the time of realization of
principal amount of refinance.

--- Page 2 ---
2. h)
PFI Agreement: All eligible banks and financial institutions must sign a
participation agreement to avail the refinance facilities under the project except
those already signed agreement under SMESPD Circular No. 06/2021. Banks/FIs
have to follow the usual prudential rules and regulations and instructions/
guidelines (SMESPD Circular No. 02/2020, SMESPD Circular No. 06/2021,
SMESPD Circular No. 09/2021 and subsequent changes there on) concerning the
CMSME stimulus loan and refinance facilities and Operations Manual of the
project.
2. k)
Recovery of Refinancing Loan (RL): BB will realize the amount refinanced to a
PFI along with applicable interest/profit/charges on completion of 1 (one) year
from the date of refinance by debiting their current accounts maintained with the
Motijheel Office of BB.

05. Accordingly, provisions in the project Operations Manual attached with the SMESPD
Circular No. 06/2021 will be changed. All other terms and conditions of said circular will remain
unchanged.

06. For participation into the project, interested banks and financial institutions (except
those already signed participation agreement with the project under SMESPD Circular No.
06/2021) are requested to apply as per the application format attached with this circular by March
10, 2023.

07. The instruction is issued under the authority conferred in section 45 of the Bank
Company Act, 1991 and section 18 of the Financial Institutions Act, 1993.

The instruction shall come into effect immediately.

Yours Sincerely,











Attachment: As mentioned.

(Md. Abdul Wahab)

Director (CECRFP)
Project Director
Phone: 88-02-9530010

--- Page 3 ---
Project Director
COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response Facility Project (CECRFP)
SME & Special Programmes Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka-1000.


Dear Sir,

Letter of Intent to become Participating Financial Institutions under AIIB funded
COVID-19 Emergency and Crisis Response Facility Project (CECRFP, L0415-A)


With reference to the SMESPD Circular Letter No.03, dated 16 February 2023, we intend
to express our interest for participating in the aforesaid project. We attach the documents as
required for your kind consideration. We also furnish the information as sought in the annexure of
the circular and in the Operations Manual.

We, therefore, request you to consider our application and allow us to work with you for
the development of CMSME sector in Bangladesh through our active participation in CECRFP
finance.


Thanking you.

Truly yours,





CEO/MD
Bank/FI Name

--- Page 4 ---
Annex-A to Accreditation Application Form
Name of Bank/ Financial Institution:
Criterion
Statement
Fulfill the Criteria
(Yes or No)
(1) Legality
Bank/Financial Institution license with BB:
(2) Operational
Establishment Year:
Experiences
(Copy of audited financial statements for the latest 3 years attached)
( > 3 years )
(3) CMSME Financing
Committed to support CMSME sector for Covid-19 emergency and crisis response
facility.

(4) Capital Adequacy
(a) Capital
Taka
billion (as of
in Net Worth
(b) Paid-up Capital
Taka
billion (as of
(c) Capital
(as of
Adequacy Ratio
(evaluated by BB)
( > 10 % )
(5) Profitability
Net Profit
Taka Billion (in Fiscal Year ending
Taka billion (in Fiscal Year ending
(6) Non-Performing
NPL Ratio:
(as of
Loans (NPL)
( < 10 % )
(7) CAMELS Rating
Determined rating for the Fiscal Year ending
(8) Prudential
“fulfilling the prudential regulations”
Regulations
(Copy of risk management procedures attached)
(a) Transparency
(b) Corporate Governance
(c) Risk Management
(d) Others, if any

--- Page 5 ---
Contact Details of Relevant Personnel


Name of the Bank/ FI

Name of the Important
Mailing Address
Electronic Communication
Sl.
Address
Address
City
Post Code
Officers
Phone Number
Fax Number
Cell phone no
Email
Line 1
Line 1