--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
website : www.bangladeshbank.org.bd
06 Ashwin, 1415
FE Circular No. 10
Date:-----------------------
21 September, 2008
All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh
Dear Sirs,
PAYMENT THROUGH INTERNATIONAL CARD
Reference is drawn to the Para No. 3, Chapter 20 and
Para No. 1(v), chapter 19 of the
Guidelines
for
Foreign
Exchange
Transactions (GFET)
1996
(Vol-1),
Circular
Letter
No.
ë©±ã˜â(A©à)43/99-575, dated 16/05/1999 and Circular Letter No. FEPD(Remittance-1)/44/2008-556,
dated 23/06/2008 regarding issuance of International Credit/Debit Cards against (i) Balance in
exporters' retention quota account (ii) annual personal travel quota entitlement of individual (iii)
balance held in resident foreign currency deposit account and (iv) foreign exchange entitlement (fixed
by the Government for each person intending to perform Hajj ) of approved private Hajj Agencies for
meeting food/lodging expenses of the pilgrims in Saudi Arabia respectively.
With a view to liberalising the system further, it has been decided that International Card
(debit/credit/pre-paid as the case may be) may also be issued against:
(1) foreign exchange entitlement fixed by the Ministry of Finance/competent authority for official or
semi official visits abroad by the officials of Government/Autonomous/Semi-autonomous institutions
etc. [Ref: Para 3, Chapter 19, GFET, 1996 (Vol-1) ];
(2) per diem foreign exchange entitlement for private sector participants for attending seminars,
conferences, workshops abroad arranged by recognised international bodies [ Ref : Para 4, Chapter 19,
GFET, 1996 (Vol-1) ];
(3) balances held in private foreign currency accounts [ Ref : Para nos. 1, 2 and 6, Chapter 10, GFET,
1996 (Vol-1) and
(4) personal entitlement fixed by the Government of Bangladesh in each year for intending pilgrims
for performing Hajj [ Ref : Para 10, Chapter 19, GFET, 1996 (Vol-1)] .
All instructions issued so far relating to issuance of international cards and those relating to
new issuances are outlined below for meticulous compliance by the ADs :
1. International Credit/Debit Card against ERQ Accounts
International Credit Card/Debit Card may be issued against the balances held in the exporters'
retention quota (ERQ) foreign currency account as per entitlement mentioned in Para 1, Chapter 20 of
the GFET 1996 (Vol-1). International cards may be issued in favour of upto three (3) top level
executives of an exporting firm/organization holding retention quota FC Accounts. An exporting firm
/organization may avail of the card facility from one card issuing company only. It will be upto the
card issuing company to accept or decline a request from an ERQ Account holding exporting
firm/organization for issuance of international cards. Cards issued against ERQ accounts may be used
only for meeting the bonafide business purposes of the exporting firm/organization as mentioned in
Chapter 20, Para 1 of the GFET 1996 (Vol-1).
Cont'd
to page 2

--- Page 2 ---
-02-
2. International Credit/Debit Card against RFCD Accounts
International Credit card/Debit Card
may be issued against the balance held in Resident
Foreign Currency Deposit (RFCD) Account [Chapter 10, Section III, GFET 1996 (Vol-1) ] by
authorised dealers in Bangladesh.
3 International Credit Card/Pre-paid Card against Travel Quota Entitlement .
ADs may issue international Credit Card/Pre-paid Card against the annual personal travel
quota entitlements of the prospective cardholders as per Para 1, Chapter19 of the GFET 1996 ( Vol-1).
While issuing card, the AD shall endorse on the passport, the value for which the card is issued. ADs
are advised to establish effective control to ensure utilisation of foreign exchange issued for (1)
SAARC countries & Myanmar and (2) Other than SAARC countries & Myanmar in the respective
areas. It is clarified that the entitlement of usual annual travel quota in respect of ( i) SAARC countries
& Myanmar and (ii) other than SAARC countries & Myanmar are mutually exclusive.
4. International Credit Card /Pre-paid Card against Govt. Officials etc.
International
Credit
Card
/Pre-paid
Card
may
be
issued
favoring
Officials
of
Government/Autonomous/Semi-autonomous institutions etc. for official/semi official visits abroad
against foreign exchange entitlement fixed by the Ministry of Finance/competent authority from time
to time [Chapter 19, Para 3 of the GFET 1996 (vol-1)]. In such case, the prospective cardholder shall
be required to submit the letter of sanction for limit of foreign exchange and the Competent Authority's
Order authorising the travel. While issuing the card, the AD shall endorse an amount not exceeding the
entitlement (as fixed by the Government/Competent Authority) on the passport. It is clarified that the
entitlement of usual annual travel quota (as mentioned in Para 1, Chapter 19) and entitlement described
in Para 3, Chapter 19 are mutually exclusive for Officials of Government/Autonomous/Semi-
autonomous institutions etc for official/semi-official visits abroad.
5. International Credit/Pre-paid Card for Private Sector Officials.
International Credit Card/Pre-paid Card may be issued favouring private sector participants
for attending seminars, conferences and workshops abroad arranged by recognised international bodies
[ Ref : Para 4, Chapter 19 of the GFET 1996 (Vol-1)]. While issuing the card, the AD shall endorse an
amount not exceeding the entitlement (as stated in the above Para of the GFET) on the passport.
However, it is clarified that the entitlement of usual annual travel quota (Para 1, Chapter 19) and
foreign exchange entitlement stated above as per diem (Para 4, Chapter 19) are mutually exclusive.
6. International Debit Card against Private Foreign Currency Accounts
International Debit Card may be issued against the balance held in Private Foreign Currency
Accounts [against the balances held in accounts opened and maintained as per Para nos. 1, 2 & 6,
Chapter, 10, GFET 1996 (Vol-1)].
7. International Debit/Pre-paid Card against Hajj Entitlement (for Private Sector Hajj
Agencies)
In each year Government declares general permission for releasing foreign exchange favouring
private sector Hajj Agencies to meet food, lodging etc. expenses of the pilgrims in Saudi Arabia
against foreign exchange entitlement fixed for each individual. Foreign exchange within the approved
limit under general authorisation may be issued in favour of approved private sector Hajj Agencies
operating
in
Bangladesh
by
the
ADs
in
the
form
of
Debit
Card/Pre-paid
card
besides
cash/TC/FDD/FTT under the following arrangements:
Cont'd
to page 3

--- Page 3 ---
-03-
(a) Hajj pre-paid card as issued within the said entitlement fixed by the Government for the
respective year shall be used in Saudi Arabia only. Unused balance (if any) shall be encashed into
Taka after return to Bangladesh and the card will be invalidated;
(b) The ADs shall have to be satisfied that endorsement of the same entitlement has not already
been made/will not be made on the pilgrim pass by another AD.
While issuing the card, the AD shall endorse an amount not exceeding Hajj entitlement (as fixed by
the Government) on the pilgrim pass.
8. International Pre-paid Card against Hajj Entitlement ( for individuals).
International Prepaid Card may be issued to intending pilgrims (individual resident Bangladesh
Nationals) for meeting expenses in Saudi Arabia while performing Hajj as per entitlement declared by
the Government in each year [Para 10, Chapter 19, GFET (Vol-1), 1996] for using in Saudi Arabia
only. While issuing the card, the AD shall endorse an amount not exceeding Hajj entitlement ( as fixed
by the Government) on the passport/pilgrim pass.
Hajj pre-paid card as issued within the said entitlement fixed by the Government for the
respective year shall be used in Saudi Arabia only. Unused balance (if any) shall be encashed into
Taka after return to Bangladesh and the card will be invalidated.
9. Payment of Mobile Phone Roaming Bill
Subject to entitlement in each of the categories mentioned above, International Cardholder may
pay their mobile phone roaming service utilization bill to mobile phone operators in Bangladesh
through International Card. For realization of roaming bills, the mobile phone operator will specify the
bill under the category of SAARC (including Myanmar) and Non-SAARC countries including the
amount of security deposit of the customer (if any).
10. Other Instructions
The following requisites, instructions etc., shall have to be meticulously complied with while
issuing such international cards :
i) A declaration from the intending cardholder stating that he is not availing himself of any
International Credit Card/Debit Card/Pre-paid Card from any other AD against the same account or the
same entitlement;
(ii) In case the card is issued by a bank against any ERQ/RFCD/FC account maintained in
another bank, an authorization has to be obtained from the prospective card holder allowing the card
issuing bank to have
lien and debit authority for the said account from the bank maintaining that
account;
(iii) Effective control system must be ensured by the issuing bank to guard against unwanted
drawings in excess of the entitlement or balance in the respective foreign currency accounts (as
the case may be). To facilitate monitoring towards limiting the liabilities on account of card use, the
FC Account holding ADs may from time to time advise the card issuing bank about the credit balances
of the FC Account;
(iv) The cards shall have to be withheld/invalidated as soon as the fund available in the
ERQ/RFCD/FC
account
is
fully
utilized/exhausted
unless
there
is
reasonable
prospect
of
replenishment;
Cont'd to page 4

--- Page 4 ---
-04-
(v) In cases of issuances of International Cards against ERQ/RFCD/FC accounts, the amount
of the respective card shall be under lien so that under no circumstances related account is
overdrawn. Yet for any unforeseen reason, if any account becomes overdrawn at any point of time, the
same shall have to be immediately reported to the Bangladesh Bank clarifying the reason and remedial
measure thereof;
(vi) All records, documents, accounting statements relating to issuance and use of credit cards
should be kept ready and available for inspection /examination by Bangladesh Bank as and when
required.
11. Reporting
Upon issuance of card(s), a report must immediately be sent to Foreign Exchange Policy Department
(Division-2), Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka as per proforma given in Appendix-1. Issuance
of International Cards and release of foreign exchange thereagainst under the different categories of
entitlement as mentioned above shall have to be reported to Bangladesh Bank [Foreign Exchange
Policy Department (Division-2) and Statistics Department] by the Head Office/ Country Office of
ADs by 12th of the following month with usual monthly returns
according to the instructions
furnished in appendix -2. Besides, a statement of utilization/payment of foreign exchange against
international cards has to be submitted on monthly basis as per
Appendix 3
by the Head
Office/Country Office by 12th of the following month.
Instructions as mentioned in Para 3, Chapter 20 regarding International Credit Card would be deemed
amended accordingly.
Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of all concerned. Meanwhile, please
acknowledge receipt hereof.
Yours faithfully,
(Ahmed Ehteshamul Haider)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 7120375

--- Page 5 ---
Appendix-1
Statement Regarding Issuance of International Cards
Name of the Bank and Branch :
1. Name and Address of the individual/exporting firm/organization( along with passport no. and
nationality in case of individual):
2. Card Issued against ( indicate/mark the appropriate):
(i) Exporters' retention quota (ERQ) accounts
(ii) Annual travel quota entitlement
(iii) Resident foreign currency deposit (RFCD) accounts
(iv) Entitlement for official visits abroad
(v) Per diem entitlement for private sector participants
(vi) Private foreign Currency Account
(vii) Hajj entitlement ( Hajj Agencies)
(viii) Hajj entitlement (Individual)
2. Particulars of ERQ/RFCD/FC Account opened in the name of the exporting
firm/organization/individual
(a) A/c number and date of opening:
(b) Name and address of the Bank
3. Name(s) and designation(s) of executive(s) of the exporting firm/organization to whom credit cards
have been issued and date of issue along with Passport No and nationality:
4. Name and address of the card issuing organization:
Seal of the
card issuing bank
Signature of Authorised Officer of
the Card issuing bank :
Name and designation :

--- Page 6 ---
Appendix : 2
International Card : Reporting Return/Schedule
International Card Issued
Reporting Return /Schedule
Against balances held in ERQ Accounts
EFCS-8, EFCP-2
ii
Against balances held in RFCD Accounts
App 5/6
(Vol-1)
iii
Against Travel Quota Entitlement
E3-P3, P
iv
Against official entitlement for govt. officials etc.
E3-P3, P
Against per diem entitlement for Private Sector
Participants
E3-P3, P
vi
Against FC Account - other than Bangladeshi
Against FC Account - Bangladeshi
FCS-7, FCP-4
vii
Against Hajj Entitlement ( Hajj Agencies)
E3-P3, P
viii
Against Hajj Entitlement ( Individual)
E3-P3, P

--- Page 7 ---
Appendix : 3
Monthly Statement of Utilization/Payment of Foreign Exchange Against International Cards
Reporting Month :
Year
Name of the Bank :
Part - A
Sl. No
International Card Issued
No of cards under
report
Limit Allowed
Expenses
incurred during
the month ( in
USD)
Paid to Card
Issuing
Organizations
during the month
( in USD)
Paid to Mobile
Operators as
Roaming Bill
during the month
( in USD)
Total
amount
paid
( 6+7)
Collected
amount
from the
card
holders in
US$
Against balances held in ERQ
Accounts
ii
Against balances held in RFCD
Accounts
iii
Against balances held in FC
Account - other than Bangladeshi
iv
Against balances held in FC
Account - Bangladeshi
Against Travel Quota Entitlement
vi
Against official entitlement for
Govt. officials etc.
vii
Against per diem entitlement for
Private Sector Participants
viii
Against Hajj Entitlement
( Hajj Agencies)
ix
Against Hajj Entitlement
( Individual)
Total
Sub-total ( i+iv+v+vi+vii+viii+ix)
contd....................P/2

--- Page 8 ---
Appendix : 3
Page -2
Part - B
Country-wise payment (as mentioned in column 8 of Part -A) made by Authorised Dealer against International Card during the month .....................Year............
Name of the
Country Receiving
Payment
Card against ERQ
accounts
Card against travel
quota entitlement
Card against official
entitlement for govt.
officials etc.
Card against per
diem entitlement
for Private Sector
Participants
Card against Hajj
Entitlement ( private
agencies)
Card Against Hajj
Entitlement
( Individual
Card Against FC
Accounts
( Bangladesh
Nationals)
Total payment
made in USD
Country
Code
Amount
in USD
Purpose
code
Amount
in USD
Purpose
code
Amount
in USD
Purpose
Code
Amount
in USD
Purpose
Code
Amount
in USD
Purpose
Code
Amount
in USD
Purpose
code
Amount
in USD
Purpose
code
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
(3+5+7+9+11+13+15)
Note : The above statement is to be submitted to Foreign Exchange Policy Department ( Division-2) and Statistics Department of Bangladesh Bank with monthly returns .
Signature
Full name
Designation
Department
Contact Phone No
Date