--- Page 1 ---
Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
BRPD Circular No. 12

Date: 26 April, 2003

All bank companies working in Bangladesh
excepting the new banks, specialised banks
and banks incorporated outside Bangladesh.

Dear Sir:
Constitution of the Board of Directors and Fit and Proper
Test for appointment of Directors of a Bank Company.


Responsibilities of running the affairs of a bank-company, like other companies, are
entrusted to its board of directors. The responsibilities of the board of directors of a
bank-company are more important than those of other companies; because in case of a
bank-company it is essential to earn and maintain confidence of the depositors as its
business is mainly run with the depositors' money. The board of directors shall also have to
strive to protect interests of its depositors as well as of the shareholders. It is imperative to
constitute the board of directors with competent and professionally skilled persons and
limit the number of directors with a view to formulating policy-guidelines and supervising
business activities of the bank efficiently as well as ensuring good and corporate governance
in the bank management.

Bangladesh Bank deems it necessary to issue directives for compliance of the bank-
company regarding constitution of the board of directors and fit and proper test for
appointment of directors in the interest of depositors and for securing proper management
of the bank-companies. Therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 45(1) of the
Bank Companies Act, 1991, the following restrictions have been imposed regarding
constitution of the board of directors and fit and proper test criteria for consideration and
compliance of the appointing authority (viz.- general meeting, board of directors etc.)
regarding appointment or reappointment and filling up of casual vacancy of the offices of
bank directors:

Constitution of the Board of Directors:-
a) The board of directors of the bank-companies shall be constituted of maximum
13 (thirteen) directors. However, the directors of the banks, where the number of
directors is more than this number, shall be allowed to complete their present
tenure of office. This restriction shall apply to appointment/reappointment of the
directors against retirement or filling casual vacancy subject to section 15 KaKa of
the Bank Companies Act, 1991.
b) Not more than one member of a family will become director of a bank. For this
purpose family members shall include spouse, parents, children, brothers and
sisters of the director and other persons dependent on him/her.

Fit and Proper Test:-
a) The concerned person must have management/business or professional experience
for at least 10 (ten) years;
b) (S)he has not been convicted in any criminal offence or involved in any
fraud/forgery, financial crime or other illegal activities;
c) (S)he has not been subject to any adverse findings in any legal proceedings,
d) (S)he has not been convicted in regard to contravention of rules, regulations or
disciplines of the regulatory authorities relating to financial sector;
e) (S)he has not been involved with a company/firm whose registration/license has
been revoked or cancelled or which has gone into liquidation;

--- Page 2 ---
Loans taken by him/her or allied concern from any bank or financial institution
have not become defaulted;
g) (S)he has not been adjudicated a bankrupt by a court;
h) (S)he must be loyal to the decisions of the board of directors. However, in case of
note of dissent, (s)he may record it in the minutes of the board meeting and/or
bring it to the notice of Bangladesh Bank considering its merit.

A person, proposed as a candidate for the office of director, shall furnish along with
the consent letter for the purpose of section 93 of the Companies Act, 1994 a declaration as
per the attached format (Annexure-A) that (s)he is not disqualified to become a bank
director in accordance with the above mentioned fit and proper test.

The declaration shall have to be singed by the concerned person (candidate) and if
elected it shall have to be forwarded to Bangladesh Bank by the Chairman of the board of
directors.

The above-mentioned restrictions for qualifications of bank directors shall be in
addition to any related laws/regulations for the time being in force.


The chief executive of the bank shall apprise the shareholders, directors and
chairman of the above-mentioned fit and proper test criteria for appointment of directors.


This circular shall take effect immediately.


Please acknowledge receipt.





Yours faithfully,

Sd/-
(Ahmed Ehteshamul Haider)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 7120377

--- Page 3 ---
Annexure-A
Declaration


I do hereby declare that I am eligible to become a director of bank-company as per
the fit and proper test criteria issued by Bangladesh Bank vide BRPD Circular No. 12 dated
26 April 2003. I further declare that-

I have not been convicted in any criminal offence or involved in any fraud/forgery,
financial crime or other illegal activities;

There is no adverse opinion/findings regarding me in any legal proceedings,

I have not been convicted in regard to contravention of rules, regulations and
disciplines of the regulatory authorities relating to financial sector;

I have not been involved with a company/firm whose registration/license has
been revoked or cancelled or which has gone into liquidation;

There are no loans taken by me or my allied concern from any bank or financial
institution that have become defaulted;

I have not been adjudicated a bankrupt by a court;

My spouse, parents, children, brothers and sisters or any other person dependent
on me is not a director of this bank.


Dated:
Signature:


Countersigned:
Chairman, Board of Directors
……...….……….…. Bank Ltd.