--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bangladesh-bank.org
www.bangladeshbank.org.bd


Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
December 31, 2008
BRPD Circular No. 09 Date:-------------------------
Poush 17, 1415


Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,

Guidelines on ‘Risk Based Capital Adequacy for Banks’
(Revised regulatory capital framework in line with Basel II)

To comply with international best practices and to make the bank's capital more
risk-sensitive as well as to build the banking industry more shock absorbent and stable,
all the scheduled banks will start implementing revised regulatory capital framework
"Risk Based Capital Adequacy for Banks" from January 2009. With a view to above,
a National Steering Committee and a Coordination Committee on Basel II
Implementation have been working since July 2005.
To assess the supervisory effectiveness and operational independence of BB, a
self-audit on compliance with Basel Core Principles (BCP) for effective banking
supervision was made in October 2006. This shows favourable position for Basel II
implementation in Bangladesh. A study carried out on banks which suggested initial
implementation of Basel II with the following specific approaches:
A) Standardized Approach for calculating Risk Weighted Assets (RWA) against
Credit Risk;
B) Standardized (Rule Based) Approach for calculating RWA against Market
Risk ; and
C) Basic Indicator Approach for calculating RWA against Operational Risk.

Under the Standardized Approach of the Risk Based Capital Adequacy
Framework (Basel II), credit rating is to be determined on the basis of risk profile
assessed by the External Credit Assessment Institutions (ECAIs) duly recognized by BB.
Page 1 of 2

--- Page 2 ---
All scheduled banks will be required to nominate recognized ECAIs for their own
as well as their counterparty credit rating.
In this perspective, the revised regulatory capital framework "Risk Based Capital
Adequacy for Banks" has been devised and a soft copy (CD Rom) is attached for perusal.
Along with the existing capital adequacy rules & reporting to BB (Ref. BRPD
Circular no. 10, dated 25-11-2002) banks will start quarterly reporting as per the set of
reporting formats enclosed in the Guideline. For the purpose of statutory compliance
during the period of parallel run i.e. 2009, the computation of capital adequacy
requirement under existing rules will prevail. Regular reporting in line with the Guideline
should reach the Department of Offsite Supervision (DOS) by the end of the month
following the end of each quarter.
This Circular along with the Guidelines is also available on the BB website.
Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours sincerely,



(Abu Hena Mohd. Razee Hassan)
General Manager
Phone: 7117825



Encl: As above (CD Rom)





Page 2 of 2