--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bangladesh-bank.org
www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
February 19, 2007
BRPD Circular No.01




Date : ------------------------










Falgun 07, 1413

Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh



Dear Sir,


Master Circular on Capital Adequacy of Banks

Please refer to our BRPD Circular No. 10 dated November 25, 2002 on the captioned
subject and also to the Annexure-II containing Risk Weights Applicable for Balance-Sheet Items.

02.
Risk Weights Applicable for On Balance-Sheet Items (Other Financial Institutions under
Advances Head) have been reviewed and it has been decided to add an on-balance sheet item
named Claims on AAA rated Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) with risk weights of
20%.
As such items under Advances now stand as under:

7. Advances

a) Government


1) Ministry of Food









2) President's Office, Prime Minister's Office, Parliament,

Judiciary & Non-Food Ministries


3) Autonomous & Semi-Autonomous bodies



20%


b) Other Financial Institutions:


1) Other Financial Institutions-Public




20%


2) Other Financial Institutions-Private




50%


3) Claims on AAA rated Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs)
20%



c) Major Non-financial Public Enterprises




50%

d) Other Non-financial Public Enterprises





50%

e) Local Authorities







20%

f) Private Sector







100%

g) Deposit Money Banks







20%


contd.........P/02

--- Page 2 ---
-02-

03.
Risk Weights Applicable for Off-Balance Sheet Items (Contingent Assets as per contra)
have also been reviewed and it has been decided to add an Off-balance sheet item named Claims
guaranteed by, or collateralized by securities issued by AAA rated Multilateral Development
Banks (MDBs) with risk weights of 20%.

As such items under Other Assets now stand as under:

10. Other Assets

a) Contingent Assets as per contra (Off-balance sheet items)



1) Letter of Credit and Letter of Guarantee



issued on account of Government



2) Deposit Money Banks






20%


3) Others








50%


4) Claims guaranteed by, or collateralized by securities issued
20%
by AAA rated Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs)


b) Fixed Assets







50%

c) Valuation adjustments






50%

d) Expenditure Account






e) Other








100%




Note: Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) are: the World Bank Group comprised of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the
Asian Development Bank(ADB), the African Development Bank (AfDB), the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), the European
Investment Bank (EIB), the European Investment Fund (EIF), the Nordic Investment Bank (NIB), the
Caribbean Development Bank(CDB), the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) and the Council of Europe
Development Bank (CEDB).


Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours sincerely,



(Naba Gopal Banik)
General Manager
Phone : 7117825