--- Page 1 ---
Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.

BRPD Circular No.01

05 January,2005
Date------------------------
22 Pous, 1411

All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh



Dear Sir,

Regarding formation of "Complaint Cell" in the Banks


Recently it has been observed that a large number of complaints are being received by
Bangladesh Bank about various irregularities of the Banks. It is not only consuming a lot of time to
resolve those complaints but also increasing the workload. In these circumstances, the Banks are
advised to form "Complaint Cell" to resolve the complaints received by them.

2. The modus operandi, structure and monitoring process of the "Complaint Cell" should be as
follows:-

Ka)
The said "Complaint Cell" will be formed at the Head Office of the Bank and under the direct
supervision of the Chief Executive.

Kha)
The "Complaint Cell" will take necessary steps to resolve the complaint against
officer/employees of the respective Bank as soon as possible. In general, the complaints must
be resolved within 10 days, but in no case the time limit shall exceed 45 days.

Ga)
The Chief Executive of the Bank shall monitor activities of the Cell regularly.

Gha)
Necessary manpower for the Cell have to be provided.

Uma)
The Bank shall arrange to inform their branches and customers about formation of the
"Complaint Cell".

Cha)
The measures taken by the Banks against the complaints received in the Cell shall have to be
sent in following format on quarterly basis within 15th of the month following the quarter
concerned to the Department of Banking Inspection-1 (Vigilance Division) of Bangladesh
Bank regularly.

Sl.
No.
No. of cmplaints
received
No. of complaints
resolved
No. of complaints
unresolved.
Remarks/Comments
(if any)


The 1st quarterly statement is to be prepared covering the period January-March/05.


You are advised to form the "Complaint Cell" within 30-01-05 and inform us about the
formation of Cell (Including the names, designation & telephone number of the personnel placed in
the Cell)



Yours faithfully,


(Md. Jahangir Alam)
Deputy General Manager
Phone:7125844