--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bangladesh-bank.org
www.bangladeshbank.org.bd
Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
July 09 , 2007
BRPD Circular No. 07




Date : ---------------------










Ashar 25 , 1414
Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,

Implementation of Credit Risk Grading Manual


Please refer to BRPD Circular No. 18 dated December 11, 2005 wherein all scheduled
Banks were advised to implement Credit Risk Grading Manual for all exposures (irrespective of
amount) other than those covered under Consumer and Small Enterprises Financing Prudential
Guidelines and also under The Short-Term Agricultural and Micro-Credit .

The above Credit Risk Grading Manual was applicable in case of lending to all commercial
clients including Banks and Non-banking Financial Institutions (NBFIs). But financing to Banks
and NBFIs in line with the said Credit Risk Grading Manual was found difficult and complex. It is
to mention in this regard that the nature of business as well as leverage level of Banks and NBFIs
are different from that of other borrowing clients for which a separate Credit Risk Grading Manual
is needed. Moreover, Basel II compliance calls for risk rating of the obligor, which includes all
clients like commercial, banking and non-banking financial institution.

In view of the above, two separate manuals (Credit Risk Grading Manual-Bank and Credit
Risk Grading Manual-NBFI) have been prepared which are forwarded herewith in the form of CD-
ROM.

Banks are therefore, advised to adopt the credit risk grading system outlined in the said two
manuals for assessing credit risk in case of taking exposure on another Bank/NBFI. Banks are also
advised to implement the same by October, 2007 and submit a compliance report to Banking
Regulations and Policy Department by November 15, 2007 to the effect that the Credit Risk
Grading has been put in place. The existing Credit Risk Grading Manual, however, shall remain in
force for financing all commercial clients other than Banks and NBFIs.


Please acknowledge receipt.
Yours sincerely,
Enclo: 1(one) CD-ROM
Banks
Non-banking Financial Institutions (NBFIs).

(Naba Gopal Banik)
General Manager
Phone : 7117825