--- Page 1 ---
Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
BRPD Circular No.14

Date: 25 June 2003

All scheduled banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir:

Amendments to the forms of the First Schedule of the Bank Companies Act, 1991

Attention of the banks is drawn to BRPD Circular No. 03 dated 18 April 2000 on the captioned
subject. It has been decided to amend the forms of financial statements and directives for
preparation thereof with a view to bringing in more disclosure in the financial statements of the
bank companies. The forms of the first schedule of the Bank Companies Act, 1991 as amended
under sub-section 38(4) of the act have been annexed herewith. The financial statements to be
prepared as per the amended forms and instructions taking effect from the last working day of the
year 2003 will help the users of the statements get adequate and transparent idea about the
concerned bank company.

Please acknowledge receipt.



Encl: 16 pages.

Yours faithfully,

Sd/-
(Ahmed Ehteshamul Haider)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 7120377

--- Page 2 ---
First Schedule
(Section 38)
Balance Sheet Form
Balance Sheet
As at …………….. 20 ……


Note
Current year
(TK)
Previous
year (TK)
PROPERTY AND ASSETS

Cash*:
Cash in hand
(Including foreign currency)
Balance with Bangladesh Bank and its agent bank(s)
(Including foreign currency)
Balance with other banks and financial institutions
In Bangladesh
Outside Bangladesh
Money at call on short notice
Investments:
Government
Others
Loans and Advances:
Loans, Cash Credit, Overdrafts etc.
Bills purchased & discounted
Fixed assets including premises, furniture and fixtures
Other assets
Non-banking assets



01




02


03
04


05

06
07
08
09


Total Assets:



LIABILITIES AND CAPITAL

Liabilities:
Borrowings from other banks, financial institutions and agents
Deposits and other accounts:
Current Accounts and other Accounts
Bills Payable
Savings Bank Deposits
Fixed Deposits
Bearer Certificates of Deposit
Other Deposits
Other liabilities




10
11






12


Total Liabilities:



Capital/Shareholders' Equity

Paid up Capital
Statutory Reserve
Other Reserve
Surplus in Profit and Loss A/C



13
14
15
16


Total Shareholders' Equity**



Total Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity




see Cash Flow Statement
see Statement of Changes in Equity

--- Page 3 ---
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ITEMS


Note
Current year (TK)
Previous year (TK)

Contingent liabilities:

Acceptances & Endorsements
Letters of Guarantee
Irrevocable Letters of Credit
Bills for Collection
Other Contingent Liabilities


17


Total:




Other commitments:

Documentary credits and short term trade-related
transactions
Forward assets purchased and forward deposits
placed
Undrawn note issuance and revolving underwriting
facilities
Undrawn formal standby facilities, credit lines and
other commitments




Total:




Total Off-Balance Sheet items including
contingent liabilities:

--- Page 4 ---
First Schedule
(Section 38)
Profit and Loss Account Form
Profit & Loss Account for the year ended as on …………….. 20 ……


Note
Current year (TK)
Previous year (TK)
Interest income
Interest paid on deposits and borrowings etc.

19
20


Net interest income

Investment income
Commission, exchange and brokerage
Other operating income


21
22
23


Total operating income



Salary and allowances
Rent, taxes, insurance, electricity etc.
Legal expenses
Postage, stamp, telecommunication etc.
Stationery, Printings, Advertisements etc.
Chief Executive's salary and fees
Directors' fees
Auditors' fees
Charges on loan losses
Depreciation and repair of bank's assets
Other expenses






24



Total operating expenses



Profit/Loss before provision

Provision for loan
Provision for diminution in value of investments
Other provisions


25
26
27


Total provision



Total Profit/Loss before taxes




Provision for Taxation

Net Profit after Taxation

Appropriations:

Statutory Reserve
General Reserve
Dividends etc.





28


Retained surplus



Earning per share (EPS)

--- Page 5 ---
Cash Flow Statement
For the year ended as on …… 20 ……


Current
year (TK)
Previous
year (TK)
Cash flows from operating activities

Interest receipts in cash
Interest payments
Dividends receipts
Fee and commission receipts in cash
Recoveries on loans previously written off
Cash payments to employees
Cash payments to suppliers
Income taxes paid
Receipts from other operating activities (item-wise)
Payments for other operating activities (item-wise)


Operating profit before changes in operating assets and liabilities


Increase/Decrease in operating assets and liabilities

Statutory deposits
Purchase/sale of trading securities
Loans & advances to other banks
Loans & advances to customers
Other assets (item-wise)
Deposits from other banks
Deposits from customers
Other liabilities account of customers
Trading liabilities
Other liabilities (item-wise)


Net cash from operating activities


Cash flows from investing activities

Proceeds from sale of securities
Payments for purchase of securities
Purchase/sale of property, plant & equipment
Purchase/sale of subsidiary


Net cash from investing activities


Cash flows from financing activities

Receipts from issue of loan capital & debt security
Payments for redemption of loan capital & debt security
Receipts from issue of ordinary share
Dividends paid



Net cash from financing activities



Net increase/decrease in cash
Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash-equivalent*


Cash and cash -equivalents at beginning period


Cash and cash equivalents at end of period



Explanations with detailed information shall have to be furnished regarding the effects of
exchange rate changes on cash and cash-equivalents. Cash and cash-equivalents consist of
cash with Bangladesh Bank, with its agent bank(s), government securities and deposits with
other banks.

--- Page 6 ---
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY

For the year ended ……… 20 ………


Paid-up
Capital
Statutory
Reserve
General
Reserve
Profit and
Loss
Total
Balance as at 01 January 20 ….





Changes in accounting policy
Restated balance





Surplus/deficit on account of revaluation of
properties
Surplus/deficit on account of revaluation of
investments
Currency translation differences





Net gains and losses not recognized in the income
statement
Net profit for the period
Dividends
Issue of share capital






Balance as at 31 December 20 …







Liquidity Statement
(Asset and Liability Maturity Analysis)
As at ……………. 20 ……….


upto 01
month
1 - 3
months
3 - 12
months
1 - 5
years
more than
5 years
Total
Assets:

Cash in hand
Balance with other banks and financial
institutions
Money at call on short notice
Investment
Loans and Advances
Fixed assets including premises, furniture
and fixtures
Other assets
Non-banking assets







Total Assets







Liabilities:

Borrowings from Bangladesh Bank, other
banks, financial institutions and agents
Deposits
Other accounts
Provision and other liabilities







Total Liabilities







Net Liquidity Gap

--- Page 7 ---
Instructions for preparation of financial statements

Instructions on Notes to Balance Sheet items

Cash:

(a) Local currency and foreign currency amounts in hand should be shown separately
under the head Cash in hand.
(b) Balance with Bangladesh Bank and its agent bank(s) will be shown separately in
local and foreign currency. Statutory deposit with Bangladesh Bank should be
shown separately.

Balance with other banks and financial institutions:

(a) Balances with other banks and financial institutions should be segregated into two
sub-heads viz., (i) In Bangladesh and (ii) Outside Bangladesh and should also
state whether in current account or any other form of deposit. In case of foreign
currency deposit, currency-wise amount and exchange rate should be mentioned.
(b) The balance with other banks and financial institutions should be analysed as per
the remaining maturity grouping.

Money at call on short notice:
Bank/financial institution-wise balance should be shown separately.

Investments:
Investments should be shown under the following heads:

Government Securities
Treasury bill;
(II)
National Investment bond;
(III)
Bangladesh Bank Bills;
(IV)
Government Notes/Bond;
Prizebond;
(VI)
Others.

Securities under lien against repurchase agreement should be mentioned
separately.
Other Investments
Shares to be classified into preference, ordinary, deferred and other classes
of shares showing separately shares fully paid up and party paid up.
(II)
Debentures & bond
(III)
Other investments
(IV)
Gold etc.

All investments in shares and securities (both dealing and investment) should
be revalued at the year-end. The quoted shares should be valued as per
market price in the stock exchange(s) and unquoted shares as per book value
of last audited balance sheet. Provisions should be made for any loss arising
from diminution in value of investments. The current and long-time investment
securities should be shown separately analysing as per the remaining maturity
grouping.

--- Page 8 ---
Loans and Advances:

(a) Loans and advances should be shown as per the remaining maturity grouping in
the following order:

Repayable on demand
Not more than 3 months
More than 3 months but not more than 1 year
More than 1 year but not more than 5 years
More than 5 years.

(b) The items of loans and advances i.e., loans, Cash credits, Overdrafts should be
segregated into two sub-heads viz., (i) within Bangladesh and (ii) outside
Bangladesh

(c) The loans and advances should be analysed to disclose any significant
concentration such as:-
Advances to allied concerns of directors;
(ii)
Advances to Chief Executive and other senior executives;
(iii)
Advances to customers' group (number of clients and outstanding amount of
loans and advances each amounting more than 15% of bank's total capital and
classified amount therein and measures taken for recovery of such loan should
be mentioned);
(iv)
Industry-wise;
Geographical location-wise.

(d) The loans and advances should also be classified into the categories of
'unclassified`, 'sub-standard', 'doubtful' and 'bad/loss' in accordance with
Bangladesh Bank directives.
(e) Loans and Advances should also be categorized on the basis of the following
particulars:

Loans considered good in respect of which the banking company is fully
secured;
(ii)
Loans considered good against which the banking company holds no security
other than the debtor's personal guarantee;
(iii)
Loans considered good secured by the personal undertakings of one or more
parties in addition to the personal guarantee of the debtor;
(iv)
Loans adversely classified; provision not maintained thereagainst;
Loans due by directors or officers of the banking company or any of these
either separately or jointly with any other persons.
(vi)
Loans due from companies or firms in which the directors of the banking
company have interests as directors, partners or managing agents or in case
of private companies as members;
(vii)
Maximum total amount of advance including temporary advance made at any
time during the year to directors or managers or officers of the banking
companies or any of them either separately or jointly with any other person;
(viii) Maximum total amount of advances, including temporary advances granted
during the year to the companies or firms in which the directors of the banking
company have interests as directors, partners or managing agents or in the
case of private companies as members;
(ix)
Due from banking companies;

--- Page 9 ---
Amount of classified loan on which interest has not been charged, should be
mentioned as follows:
Decrease/increase in provision, amount of loan written off and amount
realised against loan previously written off;
Amount of provision kept against loan classified as 'bad/loss' on the date
of preparing the balance sheet;
Interest creditable to the Interest Suspense a/c;
(xi)
Cumulative amount of the written off loan and the amount written off during
the current year should be shown separately. The amount of written off loan
for which lawsuit has been filed should also be mentioned.

Bills purchased and discounted:

(a) Bill discounted and purchased will exclude Government Treasury bills. These bills
should be classified into two sub-heads viz., (i) payable in Bangladesh and (ii)
payable outside Bangladesh.
(b) The bills discounted and purchased should be analysed as per the following
remaining maturity grouping:
Payable within 1 month;
Over 1 month but less than 3 months;
Over 3 months but less than 6 months;
6 months or more.

Fixed assets including premises, furniture and fixtures:

(a) Premises wholly or partially occupied by the banking company for the purpose of
its business should be shown against "Fixed assets including premises (less
accumulated depreciation)". In case of fixed capital expenditure, the original cost,
and additions thereto and reductions therefrom during the year should be stated,
as also the total depreciation written off or where sums have been written off on
account of reduction of capital or revaluation of assets. Every balance sheet after
the first balance sheet subsequent to the reduction or revaluation should show the
reduced figures with the date and amount of the reduction made. Furniture &
fixture and other assets, terms of which have been completed and value written
off, need not be shown in the balance sheet. However, if serviceability of such
asset remains, its market value may be mentioned in the notes. Explanation for the
bases of asset valuation and outcome of depreciation should be mentioned in
details.
(b) A statement of the premises not used by the bank for its own or business purpose
or the remaining part of the partially used premises and item-wise revenue
generated from such assets should be incorporated.

Other assets:

(a) Other assets should be classified under the following categories:

Investment in shares of subsidiary companies (In Bangladesh and outside
Bangladesh);
(ii)
Stationery, stamps, printing materials in stock etc.;
(iii)
Advance rent and advertisement;
(iv)
Interest accrued on investment but not collected, commission and
brokerage receivable on shares and debentures and other income
receivable;
Security deposit;

--- Page 10 ---
(vi)
Preliminary, formation and organization expenses, renovation/development
expenses and prepaid expenses;
(vii)
Branch adjustment;
(viii)
Suspense Account;
(ix)
Silver;
Others.
(b) Other assets should be classified as per instruction of Bangladesh Bank and
shown accordingly.
(c) Non-income-generating other assets item(s) should be shown separately.

Non-banking assets:

These represent assets acquired in satisfaction of claims. Its holding period should be
separately mentioned. Value shown shall not exceed the market value. Non-income-
generating non-banking item(s) should be shown separately.

10.
Borrowings from other banks, financial institutions and agents:

These should be segregated into
(a) (i) In Bangladesh, and (ii) Outside Bangladesh;
(b) (i) Secured (stating the nature of securities) and (ii) Unsecured borrowing.
(c) (i) Repayable on demand (ii) Others (based on agreed maturity dates and periods
of notice).

11.
Deposits and other accounts:

The deposits should be analysed in terms of the following remaining maturity grouping
showing separately other deposits and inter-bank deposits:

Repayable on demand;
Repayable within 1 month;
Over 1 month but within 6 months;
Over 6 months but within 1 year;
Over 1 year but within 5 years;
Over 5 years but within 10 years;
Unclaimed deposits for 10 years or more held by the bank should be shown separately.

12.
Other liabilities;

Under this heading may be included such items as the following: Accumulated provision
for loans and advances including bad debts, other provision, cumulative balance of
interest suspense account, pension and insurance funds, unclaimed dividends, advance
payments and unexplored discounts, liabilities to subsidiary companies, provision for
taxation and any other liabilities.

Provision for loans and advances:
The provision account includes provision for adversely classified loan and
general provision for unclassified loan.

--- Page 11 ---
The note on movement in specific provision for bad and doubtful debts
should be presented in the following format:

Particulars
Taka
Provisions held at the beginning of the year

Fully provided debt written off (-)

Recoveries of amounts previously written off (+)

Specific Provision for the year (+)

Recoveries and provisions no longer required (-)

Net Charge to Profit & Loss A/C (+)

Provisions held at the end of the year


(ii)
The movement in general provision on unclassified loans should also
be presented separately.

Interest Suspense Account:

This should be shown according to the following format:

Particulars
Taka
Balance at the beginning of the year

Amount transferred to "Interest Suspense" Account during the year (+)
Amount recovered in "Interest Suspense" Account during the year (-)

Amount written off during the year (-)

Balance at the end of the year



Note: Interest Suspense means unrealised interest charged on classified loans and
advances.

13.
Paid up Capital:

(a) The notes on paid up capital should disclose the following:

The various classes of capital, if any, should be distinguished. Shares issued
as fully paid up pursuant to any contract without payments in cash should be
stated separately.
ii)
Where circumstances permit, issued and subscribed capital and amount
called up may be shown as one item e.g. Issued and Subscribed Capital
………...Shares of Tk .……. paid-up.
iii)
In case of banking companies incorporated outside Bangladesh, the amount
of deposit kept with the Bangladesh Bank under sub-section (3) of section 13
of the Bank Companies Act, 1991 should be shown under this head.
(b) Capital surplus/deficit should be mentioned in the note segregating the core capital
and supplementary capital as per Bangladesh Bank directives relating to the
capital adequacy.

14.
Statutory Reserve:
(Under section 24 of Bank Companies Act, 1991)

Movement should be shown separately.

15.
Other Reserve:

(a) Movement in each of the reserve account should be shown separately.

--- Page 12 ---
(b) Any capital reserve and revaluation reserve should be disclosed separately.

16.
Surplus in Profit and Loss A/C:

Increase/decrease should be shown clearly.

17.
Contingent liabilities:

These should be explained in the following manner:

Claims lodged with the bank company, which is not recognized as loan;
Money for which the bank is contingently liable in respect of guarantee issued
favouring:
- Directors
- Government
- Bank and other financial institutions
- Others.
Commitments should be segregated as follows:
Documentary credits and short term trade related transactions;
ii)
Forward asset purchased and forward deposits placed;
iii)
Undrawn formal standby facilities, credit lines and commitments to lend:
-Under one year
-One year and over;
iv)
Spot and forward foreign exchange rate contracts;
Other exchange contracts.

N.B. Explanations for the liabilities not shown in books and provisions kept
thereagainst should be disclosed in notes.

18.
Instructions on Notes to Profit and Loss Account items:

The disclosures in the Profit and Loss Account should include, but are not limited to, the
following items of income and expenditure:

Income:

Interest, discount and similar income

Dividend income

Fee, commission and brokerage

Gains less Losses arising from dealing securities

Gains less Losses arising from investment securities

Gains less Losses arising from dealing in foreign currencies

Income from non-banking assets
Other operating income
Profit less Losses on interest rate changes.


Expenses:


Interest, fee and commission


Losses on loans and advances
Administrative expenses
Other operating expenses
Depreciation on banking assets.

--- Page 13 ---
19.
Interest income:
The major sources of interest income as arising from loans and advances to customers,
balances with other banks or financial institutions, accounts with foreign banks, etc.
should be disclosed.

20.
Interest paid on deposits and borrowings etc:
This may be shown under the heads as attributable to interest on deposits, interest on
borrowings, interest on foreign bank accounts etc.

21.
Investment income:
This will consist of sub-heads on interest on or profit from Bills, Treasury Bills, Notes,
Bonds, Shares, Debentures etc.

22.
Commission, exchange and brokerage:
Commission, exchange and brokerage should be shown separately.

23.
Other operating income:
Other operating income should be disclosed item wise.

24.
Directors' fees:

It should include:
Total fees paid for attending board meeting (rate of fee should be mentioned);
Other financial benefits [other financial benefits extended to the directors as per
section 18(1) of the Bank Companies Act, 1991 excluding fees].

25.
Provision for loan:
This will consist of the following:

(a) Provision for adversely classified loans and advances as per Bangladesh Bank
directives.
(b) Provision for unclassified loans and advances.

26.
Provision for diminution in value of investments:
Decline in value of investment should consist of the following divisions:
(a) Dealing securities
- Quoted
- Unquoted;
(b) Investment securities
- Quoted
- Unquoted.

27.
Other provisions:

Provision kept against classified other-assets etc., should be stated.

28.
Appropriations:

For the banks incorporated outside Bangladesh, policy in force for appropriation of profit
should be followed and appropriations should be mentioned accordingly.

--- Page 14 ---
General Instructions:

These instructions for disclosure of financial statements shall apply to all bank
companies and other financial institutions working in Bangladesh. The statements shall
comprise of balance sheet, profit and loss account, cash flow statement, statement of
changes in equity, liquidity statement and other explanatory notes.

Financial statements should include clear and concise disclosure of all significant
aspects of accounting principles and procedures, which have been followed. The
disclosure of all the significant accounting principles adopted shall be an integral part of
the financial statements. The principles should normally be disclosed in one place. The
principles should state the accounting conventions, bases of accounting and other
principles adopted for determination of interest income and expenses, valuation of
investment and dealing securities, segregation of balance sheet and off-balance sheet
items, bad and doubtful debts, capital, foreign currencies, tangible fixed assets etc. The
basis for determination of items relating to charges derived from general banking risks
and the accounting treatment of such charges should be disclosed.

The notes to the financial statements shall provide relevant details of the items included
in balance sheet, profit and loss account, cash flow statement, liquidity statement and
statement of changes in equity, so that adequate disclosures are made for clear
understanding of the users. The liquidity statement should be prepared according to the
remaining maturity grouping.

The value of any asset or liability as shown in the balance sheet should not be off-set by
way of deductions from another liability or asset unless there exists a legal right thereof.

The market prices of dealing securities and marketable investment securities should be
disclosed if these are different from those shown in the financial statements.

The unrealised interest of loans classified as sub-standard, doubtful and bad/loss
should not be included in the income; amount thereof should be mentioned in the notes.


The financial statements should disclose the details of the contingent liabilities and
commitments. The statements should disclose the following items/events till the date on
which the statements are prepared:
(a) the nature and amount of commitments to extend credit that are irrevocable
because they cannot be withdrawn at the discretion of the bank without the risk of
incurring significant penalty or expenses; and
(b) the nature and amount of contingencies and commitments arising from off-balance
sheet items including those relating to:
direct credit substitutes including general guarantees of indebtedness,
bank acceptance guarantees and standby letters of credit serving as
financial guarantees for loans and securities;
(ii)
certain transaction related contingencies including performance bonds, bid
bonds, warranties and standby letters of credit related to particular
transactions;
(iii)
short-term self-liquidating trade related contingencies arising from the
movement of goods, such as documentary credits where the underlying
shipment is used as security;
(iv)
those sale and repurchase agreements not recognized in the balance
sheet;

--- Page 15 ---
interest and foreign exchange rate related items including swaps, options,
futures etc.;
(vi)
other commitments viz., note issuance facilities and revolving underwriting
facilities.
(a) Any significant concentration of assets, liabilities or off-balance sheet items or such
items that might have significant influence on the state of affairs of the bank should be
disclosed in the notes of the relevant items. Such disclosure should be made in terms of
geographical areas, customer or industry-groups etc.
(b) The net amount of foreign currency exposures should be disclosed.

The aggregate amount of secured liabilities and the nature and carried amount of the
assets pledged as security, should be disclosed by way of notes.

10.
A bank whose ordinary shares are publicly traded should present Earning Per Share
(EPS) on the face of Profit and Loss Account, both in case of profit or loss per share.
The bank should make a disclosure by way of note to the financial statements of the
calculation of Earning Per Share in accordance with IAS-33.

11.
(a) The financial statements should disclose the relationship and transactions
between the bank and its related parties till the date on which the statements are
prepared. A related party transaction is built on the ability of one party to control or
significantly influence the other party either directly or indirectly. Parties may be
related if they are under common control or influence. It is necessary to look at the
substance of the relationship and not merely the legal form thereof. Even if there is
no controlling relationship, the parties may still be related as long as there is at
least significant influence of one on another. Significant influence can be attained
by representation on the board of directors, participation in the policy making
decisions, material inter-company transactions, inter-change of managerial
personnel, dependence on technical information etc. A bank may advance a large
sum or charge lower interest rates to a related party what is not usually done in
case of a party not equally related. Despite the origination of related party
transactions in the ordinary course of a bank's business, disclosure of information
about such transactions is relevant for the sake of transparency. The spouse,
parents, children, brother and sister of the bank directors and dependants of the
directors would generally be included in the related party.
(b) The following disclosures are mandatory:
Names of the Directors together with a list of entities in which they have
interests;
(ii)
All contracts of significance to which the bank, its subsidiary or any fellow
subsidiary company was a party and wherein a director has interests
subsisted at any time during the year or at the end of the year;
(iii)
Share options given to directors and executives to acquire shares at 'nil'
consideration or restricted share plan exercisable at a discount.
(iv)
The nature of the related party relationship, the types of transactions and
the elements of transactions;
The lending policy to related parties shall be disclosed and in respect of
related party transactions, the amount should include:
(a) each of loans and advances, deposits and guarantees and
commitments; disclosures may include the aggregate amounts
outstanding at the beginning and end of the period, as well as changes
during the period;
(b) each of the principal items of deposit, expense and commission;
(c) the amount of the provision against loans and advances;

--- Page 16 ---
(d) irrevocable commitments and contingencies and commitment arising
from other off-balance sheet items;
(vi)
Full disclosure of balances at the balance sheet date resulting from
transactions with directors and their related concerns shall be made
together with an analysis as to the classified and unclassified advances,
provision, if any, for possible losses on classified loans and advances,
value of the securities held etc., and the amount of the loans, adversely
classified, of the concerns of persons who were bank directors at the time
the loans were extended. If such loans were written off or waived that
should also be mentioned;
(vii)
Detailed information of any business (like receiving/extending services,
purchase/sale of properties, renting etc.) other than the banking business
with any related concerns of the directors as per section 18(2) of the Bank
Companies Act should be provided;
(viii)
Detailed information of the amount invested along with a list, in the
securities (both dealing and investment) of the directors and their related
concerns.

12.
Names of the members of the audit committee formed by the board of directors of the
bank and their qualifications should be disclosed. Confirmation as to the number of
meetings of the audit committee held with the bank's senior management to consider
and review the bank's financial statements, the nature and scope of audit reviews and
the effectiveness of the system of internal control and compliance thereof should be
made.

13.
The income items should be treated as income when there exists no risk or uncertainty
regarding its realization.

14.
Explanation regarding tax determination, provision thereagainst and approved
expenditure in relation to it should be provided.

15.
Detailed explanation about the procedure of conversion into local currency of the
transactions made in foreign currency; income-expenditure in such business, impact
(item-wise) of taxation on difference in exchange rate on assets and liabilities and
impact of difference in exchange rate on taxation etc. should be given.

16.
Reconciliation of books of accounts in regard to inter-bank (in Bangladesh and outside
Bangladesh) and inter-branch transactions and adequate explanations in case of non-
reconciliation should be provided.

17.
Detailed information should be given regarding financing and management of the fund
raised for staff pension considering it as a separate entity.

18.
The external auditors must audit at least 80% of the risk-weighted assets of the bank
before signing on the balance sheet and the person-hours they have spent for
conducting the audit should be mentioned.

19.
Figures should be rounded off to nearest Taka.

--- Page 17 ---
20.
Highlights of the bank should be presented in the annual report as under:
Highlights
SI
No
Particulars
Present Year
Previous Year
Paid up Capital


Total Capital


Capital surplus/deficit


Total Assets


Total Deposits


Total Loans and Advances


Total Contingent Liabilities and Commitments


Credit Deposit Ratio


Percentage of classified loans against total
loans and advances


10.
Profit after tax and provision


11.
Amount of classified loans during current year


12.
Provisions kept against classified loan


13.
Provision surplus/deficit


14.
Cost of fund


15.
Interest earning Assets


16.
Non-interest earning Assets


17.
Return on Investment (ROI)


18.
Return on Asset (ROA)


19.
Incomes from Investment


20.
Earning per Share


21.
Net income per Share


22.
Price Earning Ratio



21.
Copies of financial statements including the Balance Sheet should be preserved in each
of the bank branches, so that the customers of the bank may readily use those on
request. Besides, the Highlights (see general instruction no.20) and Balance Sheet
should be affixed in a visible place of each bank branch.

22.
The financial statements should be published in widely circulated one Bangla and one
English daily newspapers within one week of submission of the statements to
Bangladesh Bank so that the stakeholders of the bank including its depositors,
shareholders and regulatory bodies can get information about the bank easily. These
should also be disclosed in the bank's website.