--- Page 1 ---
Anti Money Laundering Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
Website: www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

MA:LA:PRO Circular No. - 07




Chief Executive
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Correspondent Banking.

Dear Sir,


It has been decided that banks shall gather sufficient information about their respondent banks
to understand the latters' nature of business before providing any correspondent banking services to
them with a view to deterring use of the banking system for the purpose of money laundering.
[Correspondent banking is defined as the provision by one bank (the correspondent) to another bank
(the respondent bank) of credit, deposit, collection, clearing, payment or other similar services.]
2. Banks should obtain approval from their senior management before establishing Correspondent
Banking relationship.
3. The information to be collected should include details about the respondent bank's management,
major business activities, location, money laundering prevention efforts, bank regulation and
supervision system prevailing in the country of the respondent bank, the purpose of the account etc.
4. Banks should establish or continue a correspondent relationship with a foreign bank only if it is
satisfied that the foreign bank is effectively supervised by the relevant authority.
5. Banks should not establish or continue a correspondent banking relationship with any shell bank
i.e. a bank incorporated in a jurisdiction in which the bank has no presence and which is
unaffiliated with a regulated financial group.
6. Banks should pay particular attention when maintaining a correspondent banking relationship with
banks incorporated in a jurisdiction that do not meet international standards for the prevention of
money laundering (such as Non-cooperating Countries and Territories or NCCTs listed by
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering). Enhanced due diligence will generally be
required in such cases, including obtaining details of the beneficial ownership of such banks and
more extensive information about their policies and procedures to prevent money laundering.
7. Particular care should also be exercised where the bank's respondent banks allow direct use of the
correspondent account by their customers to transact business on their own behalf (i.e. payable-
through accounts). A bank should therefore ensure whether the customers of the respondent bank
will be allowed to use the correspondent banking services and, if so, it should take steps to
complete required verification of the identity of such customers.
8. The instructions contained in this circular are also applicable for all existing correspondent
relationships.
Yours sincerely


(S M Abul Quasem)
General Manager
Phone: 7120659
Date: 14 August, 2005
30 Shraban, 1412