--- Page 1 ---
Anti Money Laundering Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
A.M.L. Circular No.: 08 Date: 21 December, 2005

All Banks

Regarding submission of cash transaction report (CTR)

Dear Sir

By the power conferred under section 4 & 19, of Money Laundering Prevention Act, 2002, the
following instructions have been issued for all the commercial banks to follow properly:

1. Each bank will analysis the transaction of their branches and submit Cash Transaction Report
(CTR) to Bangladesh Bank for the cash deposits or cash withdrawals of BDT500000.00 or
above in any account in a day according to the specimen forms Annexure-1. If the cash deposit
in an account by more than one entry in a day totals TK 5,00,000/- or above or if the cash
withdrawal from an account in a day by more than one entry totals TK. 5,00,000/- , it has to be
reported separately. Besides it has to be reported to Bangladesh Bank if one or more than one
cash remittance or online deposit totalling the above mentioned amount transacted in any single
account.
2. This report has to be submitted on monthly basis. Accordingly, report of cash transactions for
each month must be reported to Bangladesh Bank within the 21st of the following month. All
concerned parties are advised to be sincere in case of submitting the return on time; for any
kind of negligence or failure to report this CTR, the concerned bank might be penalized
according to Section 19(4) of the Money Laundering Prevention Act, 2002.
3. Transactions have to be examined properly and if any kind of suspicious transaction/
information are noticed during submitting the CTR by branches to the CAMLCO, that has to be
reported to him with all details mentioning the reason of suspicion. Similarly CAMLCO has to
check the transactions in the CTR and if any suspicion raised that has to be reported to
Bangladesh Bank with all details mentioning the reason of suspicion at the time of submitting
CTR. If no matter of suspicion noticed, a statement to be furnished along with the CTR saying,
“Nothing noticed suspicious”.
4. This directive will come into force with effect from 01 January 2006. For instance, the report of
January 2006 will be reported by prescribed date of February 2006. At this stage, both the hard
copy and soft copy of the CTR to be submitted in Bangladesh Bank. Similarly, the STR to be
reported in both the forms wef. 01 January 2006.

Please acknowledge the receipt.





Yours faithfully

Attachment: 10 pages






Sd./










(S M Abul Quashem)









General Manager










Tel:7120659.

--- Page 2 ---
Attachment no. 02
Instructions on how to complete the CTR related Forms:

1. Bank Code: There are 3 boxes/spaces under this field. The SBS code provided by the Statistics
dept of BB to be used in this case. However, a zero (0) to be inserted before the SBS code, as
typically it is of 2 digits. For example, the SBS code of Agrani Bank is 11, here the Bank code
will be 011.
Branch Code: There are 4 boxes under this field. In this case the exact SBS Branch Code to be
used.

2. Reporting Month: There are 6 boxes under this field, 2 spaces for month, i.e. for October 10;
and the rest 4 spaces are applicable for year, i.e. 2006, 2007, etc. Hence, the Reporting Month
code for March’06 will be: 032006.

3. Account Number: There are 20 boxes under this field. What ever the size of the A/C number, it
must be started from the 1st box onwards, and rest of the boxes at end may remain empty, if not
applicable. However, no other mark should be used in the empty boxes (if not applicable).

4. Account Type: There are 2 boxes under this field. Please refer to Attachment#5, for A/C Type
Codes. For example, if it is a ‘Savings Account/Taka’- the code will be ‘02’.

5. Ownership Type: There are 2 boxes under this field, too. Please refer to Attachment#5, for
Ownership Type Codes. For example, if it is a ‘Partnership Account’- the code will be ‘04’.

6. Account Title: There are 100 boxes under this field. The title has to be completed exactly how
it has been mentioned on the bank’s account opening form/ledger. However, only one letter
should place in each box, even for full stop (dot) and an additional box should be left empty
between two words. The title must be started from the 1st box and in no way other titles like,
Mr., Mrs., M/S. etc. be used and the non-applicable boxes at the end should remain empty.

7. Present/Mailing Address: There are 60 boxes in 1st three lines under this field for address and 5
boxes in the 4th line exclusively for Upazila/Thana Code as mentioned in Attachment#5.

8. Permanent/Registered Address: There are 60 boxes in 1st three lines under this field for address
and 5 boxes in the 4th line exclusively for Upazila/Thana Code as mentioned in Attachment#5.
Permanent address will be applicable for individuals whereas, Registered address will be
applicable for company/ organizations.

9. Telephone Number: There are 16 boxes in each of the 8 lines under this field, 2 lines for
residence number, 3 for office numbers and last 3 lines for mobile numbers. The structure of
phone number should follow – Country> City> phone number, as appropriate.

10. i) Tax Identification Number (TIN) & ii) Business Identification Number (BIN): There are 20
boxes in each 2 lines under this field. The numbers should be mentioned as it is prescribed by
the Income Tax & VAT authority.

--- Page 3 ---
11 Transaction Type



There are two boxes for Transaction Type. The codes according to the type of transaction are attached
here. These two boxes have to be filled in by following the codes.
Code
Definition
01
Cash Deposit
02
Cash Withdrawal
03
Cash Remittance/ Online Deposit

12 Transaction Date








d d m m y y y y
Eight boxes are given for the title ‘Transaction Date’. First two boxes are selected for date. In this case
for dates 1-9 there has to be a zero (0) in the first box. Next two boxes are for the months. 01, 02, 03,
04, 05, 06, 07, 08, 09, 10, 11 & 12 has to be used accordingly for the twelve months of the year
January- December. Last four boxes are for years. For example: 06 November 2006 will be written as
06112006.

13 Amount for the day














In the title ‘Amount for the day’ there are ten boxes for Taka & two boxes for Poisa. The total amount
has to be written if the amounts of transactions cross the lowest range of CTR in the above-mentioned
11th section. These sections are (1) Cash Deposit (2) Cash Withdrawal & (3) Cash Remittance. In every
case of crossing the limit there has to be an individual report. The vacant boxes from left have to be
filled in by zero (0) in time of writing the amount of transaction.

14. Three boxes are given for the number of transaction. The total number of daily transaction will be
mentioned here. In this case the total amount of daily transaction means the section where the cash
transaction limit has crossed (sections mentioned in no. 11). The vacant boxes from left have to be
filled in by zero (0).

15. The boxes of no. 15 have to be filled in if the Transaction Type mentioned in no. 11 is Cash
Remittance/ Online Deposit. In that case the name, account number & account type where the money
has been send and the bank code & branch code has to be filled in according to the previous
description.

16. All Owner related information in serial 16 have to be completed as mentioned previously. If there
is a single account holder then section (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), and (viii) of 16 have to be
completed. However, if the account is a company account, or other type of organisational account with
multiple account holders, or a joint or partnership account then section (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi),
(vii), and (viii) of 16 have to be separately filled for each individual. Therefore, information on all
account holders have to provided one after another. In case of a company account, all directors’
information must be provided in addition to another 3 to 5 high officials’ information.

16 has two sections on (ii) Occupation as discussed above. To fill these up attachment: 5-a titled
‘Occupation’ is provided.
POISA
TAKA

--- Page 4 ---
Attachment No. 04




Suspicious transaction report (STR)
Directive for filling in form

The following necessary explanation as to how the STR forms have to be filled in are given:

1 Bank Code


Branch Code



Under the Caption Bank Code there are three fields in which SBS bank code given by the BB’S
statistics department has to be used . Since the SBS bank code of the National Credit and Commercial
Bank LTD is 53 in which is to be written as they are.

In the branch code there are four fields. In this case SBS code given by the statistics department has to
be written as they are.

2 Reporting month








Under the caption reporting month there 6 [six] fields of which the first two are for the month as-
For January 01, Feb. 02, March. 03,April. 04, May 05, and June. 06, July. 07, August. 08,
September.09, Oct. 10, Nov.11, and December. 12 and the rest 4 ones are for the year. For the report of
2006, 2006 is to be written. This is for the report March /2006 the six fields shall be field in as 032006.

3 Account Number
5 6 7 8 9 0



Under the caption account number there are 20 fields. In this case the a/c no. is to be written from the
first field . The a/c No. May not be for 20 digits. In that case the fields towards the end shall be kept
blank. Nothing like dash or other shall be kept blank. As for example – A/C No. 567890 shall be
written as above.

A/C Type




Under A/C type head there are two fields. In this for use as per as the a/c type annexure.5 contains
code under the heading ‘A/C Type’.Example- If the A/C is savings Account /Taka the code will be 02.

Ownership type






Under ownership type caption their two fields. For the use of the type of a/c holder or ownership type
the code list is given in annexure –5 under the caption ownership type. Example- if the a/c type is
partnership account, the code will be 04.





A B
D U
L A H M O J

D E


































































































Account title

--- Page 5 ---
Under account title there are 100 fields. In this case the name as per the opening form or the ledger is
to be put as it is . If there is any coma or full stop in between the words of the name, one field will be
used for it.

Each field is to be used for each letter. One field shall be kept blank between two words as for
example- A.K.M Abdullah Mujumdar and co. If 100 fields are not required for the name, the fields on
the blank side will be kept blank. Mr., Mrs., Ms., M/S, Messars, Al-Haj cannot be used.


















































































































































Present / Mailing Address





Upazila/Thana (five digit to be used]

Under the present / Mailing address caption first 60 fields are given. In this case for each letter each
field is to be used and one field is to be kept blank between two words .If all the 60 fields are not used,
the fields towards the end are to be kept blank. In the line there five fields for Upazila/ there code-
given in annexure-5.


































Permanent/
Registered
address

Upazila/ thana [ five digit code to be
used]


Under the caption permanent / registered address there are 60 fields in the first 3 lines. In this case each
field for each letter and one field between two words blanks. If all the 60 fields are not used, the fields
to the end will be kept blank. For individual a/c permanent address and for business/ organization/
Company etc registered address .In the 4th line there are five fields to be filled with Upazila/ thana code
which is given in annexure- 5.

Country, City number
9 Telephone No.





















Residence 1





















Residence2





















Office 1





















Office 2





















Mobile 1





















Mobile2





















Mobile 3












































Under the caption telephone number there are 8 lines consisting of 16 columns of which first 2 for
residence phone No., next 3 for office Phone No. And the last 3 for mobile No. In the case of columns
for the telephone numbers of residence and office first country code and following it City Code have to
be put; the telephone number will follow. In the case of mobile- Country Code will precede the mobile

--- Page 6 ---
number. As for example takes case of an individual Chittagong whole title; Phone number is 123456.
Put B’desh code 88 first, then Chittagong Code – 031 and thereafter the telephone No.123456. It will
stand as 88-031-123456. Mobile number.
Some person Kishorigong is 015123456 which be written as 88-015123456

10
[i] Tax
identification [
TIN]



[II
Business
identification
number [BIN]



Tax identification number [TIN] and the Business Identification number [BIN] issued by the Vat
authority have to be written as they are.

11
Transaction Type




Under the caption Transaction type there are two fields in which transaction type code is to be put.

code
Definition
01
Cash Deposit
02
Cash withdrawal
03
Cash Remittance/ online deposit
04
Inward Remittance TK
05
Inward Remittance FCY
06
Outward Remittance / DD/ MT/ PO TK
07
Outward Remittance / DD/ MT/ PO FCY
08
Transfer
09
Cheque / Bill deposit /collection TK
10
Cheque / Bill deposit /collection FCY
11
LC / guarantee TK
12
LC / guarantee FCY
99
Others


12
Transaction Data


Under the caption Transaction Data there are 8 fields . First two fields are for date – from 1 to 9 with
follow zero and the next two fields are for the month as 01, 02, 03, 04, 05,06,07,08,09,10,11 and 12.
The last four fields are for the year. As for example, 6 Nov. Will be written as 06112006

--- Page 7 ---
13
Transaction
Account
Taka
pais

Under the caption Transaction account there are 10 fields for taka and two for paisa. The some total of
the transaction considered as suspicious / unusual is to be put here. If 10 fields are not required for the
amount , the fields on the left shall be filled in with zero



[ To be filled with reporting officer]
[To be filled by the Branch Anti- Money
Laundering
compliance officer]
14
Reasons for
treating
The transactions
as
Unusual/
suspicious
[ To be filled by the chief Anti – Money
Laundering compliance officer]

Under the caption reason for treating the transaction as unusual/ suspicious there are three fields of
which first one is to be filled by reporting officer after identifying the unusual/ suspicious transactions,
the second one will be filled by the Branch Anti- Money Laundering compliance officer on the basis of
investigation data and other data mentioning in it whether it was sent to the central compliance unit in
the time [if so, Ref. No. And data have to be mentioned]. The third field is to be filled by the Chief
Anti- Money Laundering Compliance officer. In this case also it must be mentioned, on the basis of
investigation and analysis if the transaction can be considered unusual / suspicious and if it has
reported to BB [if so, give Ref. No. And data]
















15
[v] Beneficiary’s
name





[iv] Account
Number






[iv] Account
type








[iv] Bank
code


Branch code




If under SL. 11 Transaction type is cash remittance/ online deposit, then the fields under SL. 15 will be
filled. In that case the name, a/c No., a/c type of the person to whose a/c the money has been deposited.

--- Page 8 ---
16
[I] owner’s name
[20 fields]










[ii] Occupation





[iii] Father’s name








[iv] Mother’s name











[v] Date of birth





[vi] Passport No.





[vii] Driving License No





[viii] TIN


The dates about owner have to be filled as per the ownership of the a/c mentioned before. If the owner
of the account is one, the filling of [ v] to [ viii] of SL.16 will do. If the owner is a company or any
entity of more than one owner or the a/c belongs to joint venture or partnership, then [i ] to [viii] of the
SL. No.16 shall have to filled with each concerned person one after another separately. That is the
data of one will follow that of the other. In that case the entity the bio-data of the direction / the
members of the Board of Directors shall have to be given together with the bio-data of 3 to 5 high
officials.

Under the caption occupation [ ii] there are 2 fields. For filling them code under occupation in
annexure- 5 is given.