--- Page 1 ---
Anti-Money Laundering Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head office
Dhaka .









Sraban 2,1409
Ma: La: Pra : Circular No. 02 . Date ----------------------










July 17,2002
All Banks and Financial Institutions

Instruction to be followed for compliance of the provisions
contained in the Money Laundering Prevention Act. 2002.

Dear Sirs,

Attention is drawn to the Ma:La:Pra: Circular No. 01 dated 18.05.2002 of the Foreign
Exchange Policy Department to the captioned subject.

02. For proper compliance of the provisions of Money Laundering Prevention Act, 2002 the
following instructions are issued as per power conferred in section 4 of the above act for compliance
by the banks and financial institutions.

(Ka) As per article 19(i) (Ka) of Money Laundering Prevention Act, 2002 each bank and
financial institution will preserve correct and full information of their customer. Incase of request to
remit money through draft/T.T from any person other than the account holder correct information
with regard to full name and address of the person requesting for such remittance should be
preserved. Detail instructions to be followed in this regard can be seen at Appendix ‘Ka’ .

(Kha) Correct and detail up to date information of transactions in each account should be
preserved and as per article 14(1) (Ka) of Money Laundering Prevention Act, 2002 the bank and
financial institution will preserve record of transaction for a period of at least five years from the
closing of transactions in the account of an client .

(Ga) To ensure compliance of the article 19 of the Money Laundering Prevention Act, 2002
each bank and financial institution will establish arrangement for internal observation and control
through formation of a Central Compliance Unit under the leadership of a high official at the Head
Office and nomination of a officer at the branch level of each bank and financial institution . In order
to accomplish properly the Jurisdiction and function of the Central Compliance Unit, each bank and
financial institution will determine institutional strategy and program . Central Compliance Unit will
issue the instructions to be followed by the branches. These instructions will be prepared on the basis
of combination of observation of transactions, internal control, policies and procedures from the point
of view to prevent money laundering .

(Gha) In order to identify and monitor unusual transactions, each bank and financial
institution will collect and preserve the prospective, transaction profile of the client. Transactions in
the account will be considered as unusual of the same is inconsistent with the declared transaction
profile provided if on enquiry the client failed to give sat satisfactory explanation .

--- Page 2 ---
(Umah) All employees of the bank and financial institution are to remain conscious and alert
to identify unusual/suspicious transactions and just after detection of unusual/suspicious transactions
which may have connections with money laundering as per article 19(1) (Ga) of Money Laundering
Prevention Act, 2002 will be reported in writing as per proforma at Appendix-Ga attached herewith
to the nominated compliance officer of the of the branch (REF. Appendix ‘Kha’ on the features of
detecting unusual/suspicious transactions). The Compliance Officer will immediately analyse the
reported incident properly and record in writing with reasons in details whether the transaction is
connected with money laundering or not. If the reported issue appears to be connected with money
laundering he will send immediately the details of the incident along with a copy of the above form to
the Central Compliance Unit. Central Compliance Unit will examine and analyse the report received
and record its observation on the above form Ga and if the incident is considered to be reportable to
Bangladesh Bank , the same should be sent immediately to Anti-Money Laundering Department,
Bangladesh bank, Head Office, Dhaka .


On the issue of reported unusual/suspicious transactions, no officer of the bank or financial
institution will disclose the same to the clients or any other persons so that the investigation are
hampered or influenced adversely.

(Cha) The nominated officer will send a consolidated quarterly statement of the cases reported
to him to the Central Compliance Unit, Head office as per Appendix- Gha attached herewith, Central
Compliance Unit will send the information of the reported cases to Anti-Money Laundering
Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head office Dhaka on quarterly basis in the same proforma .

(Chha) In order to ensure proper compliance of the Money Laundering Prevention Act, 2002
each bank and financial institution will arrange proper training to its officers.

03.
Formation of Central Compliance Unit and the reporting activities of unusual suspicious
transactions should be taken immediately as per instruction mentioned above. Detailed internal
instructions to be followed by the Central Compliance Unit and the branches should be prepared by
15th September, 2002 and should be in formed this department of it with a copy there of.

Mean while please acknowledge receipt of it .

Enclosure: As stated .
Your’s Sincerely
Sd/-
(A.K.M. Mostafizur Rahman)
Deputy General Manager
Phone - 7120659

--- Page 3 ---
Annexure-A
(Appendix-Ka)

The Indicative List of Information to be obtained
to Establish Customers' Identity

For every transaction correct identity of the customer has to be carefully ascertained . In this
connection, in the applicable cases, importance should be given to the personal interview with the
customer. For ensuring full satisfaction about the correct particulars of the customer, following
information and documents should be collected and prescrved .

Account Holder Customer :
(Ka) Personal Account :
(1) Name. (2) Present and Permanent Address, (3) Date of Birth, Age (4) Nationality, (5) TIN No.(if
any) (6) Passport or employer certificate or certificate about the credentials by the Ward
Commissioner/Union Chairman, (7) Photograph of the account holder (must be taken).

(Kha) Corporate or Business Firm Account :
Sole Proprietorship : Requisite information as stated in 1 (a) relevant for the account
operator along with trade license.

(ii)
Partnership: Requisite information as stated in 1 (a) relevant for the partners along with
Trade License and Partnership Deed.

(iii)
Limited Company: Certificate of Incorporation, Articles and Memorandum of
Association, Formal Resolution adopted in the Board meeting, declaration about the Directors
and the information of 1 (a) relevant for the account operator (for verifying the genuineness of
the information about the company and the directors, certified copies of the returns submitted
to the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies should be taken. If the Company is incorporated
outside Bangladesh, documents attested by the Bangladesh Embassies/High Commissions in
the respective countries should be submitted).

(Ga) Account of Other Organizations:
Club/Society: Particulars of the office, bearers, Constitution or By-Laws, if registered the
Government authorization letter etc.

(ii)
Co-operative Society/Limited Society: By-Laws authenticated by the Co-Operative
Officer, particulars of the office bearers, resolution for opening of account, certificate of
registration etc.

(iii)
Private School, College and Madrasha: Full particulars of the members of the
Governing Body or Managing Committee, Resolution for opening of Account, etc.

(iv)
Trustee Board: Certified copy of the deed of the trust, full particulars of the members of
the trustee Board, resolution for opening of Account, etc.

(2) Customer Other than Account Holder:
In case of request for remittance and other banking services made by the persons not
maintaining an account with the bank full name and address of the requesting persons have to be
preserved.

--- Page 4 ---
Appendix-Kha


Indicative list of issues to be looked into for
identifying unusual/suspicious transactions


If proper explanation is not received on enquiry from the client on transactions which is
inconsistent with the declared transaction profile of the client, then those transactions can be treated
as unusual transactions.

Suspicious transactions will mean those transactions which have arisen out of activities
mentioned in article 2 (Tha) of Money Laundering Prevention Act, 2002. In other words, the
transactions which generally do not appear to have not been arisen out of known and legal earnings
of the clients will be regarded as unusual transactions:

1. Some of the relevant features in identifying unusual/suspicious transaction at the branch level of
banks/financial institutions are mentioned below :

1.1 Transactions for unusually large amount inconsistent with the known income of the
individual or company.

1.2 Request for remittance to different destinations in favour of other parties with whom
connection of the client is not clear.


1.3 Although small deposits are made in each occasion, the accumulated total deposit is large
enough to be inconsistent with the known activities of the client.

1.4 At the time of opening account inability/unwillingness/delay in giving information about
the client.

1.5 Direct contact with the branch is often avoided by the representative of the company.

1.6 Sale/purchase of securities for large amount inconsistent with the legal known income of
the client.

2. Some of the relevant issues to be looked in to by the Central Compliance Unit of the bank/financial
institution in examining unusual/suspicious transactions:

2.1 Sudden unusual increase/decrease in cash transaction and internal remittance through any
branch.
2.2 Receipt of fewer number of reports on unusual/suspicious transactions in comparison to
other branches.

--- Page 5 ---
Appendix-Ga

Reporting Form of Unusual / Suspicious Transaction

Reference :Ma: La: Pra: Circular No.02 dated 17/07/2002,Section 2(Uma).
------------------ Bank / Financial Institution
------------------ Branch
1. Reporting Officer :
Name

Department/Division :
Designation


2. Information of the Suspected Person/ Institution in the Case of the Unusual / Suspicious
Transaction:
Ka)
Name
Kha) Address (Present and Permanent )
Ga)
Date of Birth
Gha) Nationality
Uma) Passport No. (If any)
Cha ) TIN No. (If any )
Chha) Account No & Type of Account
Ja)
Account Opening Date
Jha)
Name and Address of the Introducer for Opening the Account :

3. Description of Unusual/Suspicious Transaction :
Ka)
Amount of Money Involved :
Kha ) Dates of Transaction
Ga )
Type of Transaction

4. Reasons/Situations for Treating the Transaction as Unusual/Suspicious Transaction :
5. Other Information :


Signature of Officer
Time
Date
(To be filled in by the Compliance Officer of the Branch)

1. Report on the basis of investigation and analysis after detecting Unusual /Suspicious Transactions :
2. Whether the reported incident prima-facie falls under money laundering and reportable to the Central
Compliance Unit or not : Yes/No.
3. Date and Reference No of reporting to the Central Compliance Unit :

Date and Signature of the
Branch Compliance Officer
(To be filled in by the Central Compliance Unit)

1. Report on the basis of investigation and analysis after detecting an unusual /suspicious transactions
2. Whether the transaction falls under money laundering and need to be reported to Bangladesh Bank :
Yes/No .
3. Date and Reference No of reporting to Bangladesh Bank .
Signature of the designated officer of the Central Compliance Unit
Reference No.
Telephone and Fax No-

--- Page 6 ---
Appendix -Gha

Quarterly Statement on Unusual /Suspicious Transactions



----------------------Bank


----------------------Branch

Consolidated quarterly statement as at -----------------



Sl No
Date of
Reporting
Brief
description of
the incidence
Whether the incidence
has been reported to the
Central Compliance
Unit, if so, Ref No and
date
Whether the incidence has been
reported to Bangladesh Bank by
the Central Compliance Unit, if
so, Ref No and date








Signature of Authorized Officer
Date
*Not required to be filled in by the branch