--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
Web site: www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 15




Date: August 07, 2011


All Authorized Dealers of
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,

Repatriation of Export Proceeds Through
Online Payment Gateway Service Providers


In view of the growing role of the services provided by the Online Payment Gateway
Service Providers (OPGSPs), it has been decided to allow the Authorized Dealers (ADs) to offer
the facility of repatriation of remittances against small value service exports in non-physical
form such as data entry/data process, off-shore IT service, business process outsourcing etc.
through the OPGSPs, subject to compliance of the following instructions:

(a) ADs shall enter into standing arrangements with internationally recognized OPGSPs
and maintain separate Nostro collection account for each OPGSP to repatriate the above
mentioned service export related payments. Service exporters availing of this facility shall open
notional accounts with the OPGSPs. It is to be ensured that no funds are retained in such
accounts and all receipts should be automatically swept and pooled into the Nostro collection
account maintained by the ADs.

(b) This facility shall only be available for service export in non-physical form of value
not exceeding USD 500 (US Dollar five hundred).

(c) The following debits will only be permitted to the Nostro collection account opened
and maintained under this arrangement:

i) Repatriation of funds representing service export (as mentioned in the opening
paragraph) proceeds to Bangladesh for payment to service exporters;
ii) Payment of fee/commission to the OPGSP as per the predetermined rates/
frequency/arrangement; and
iii) Charge back to the service recipient/importer where the service exporter has failed
in discharging the obligations as per specifications.

(d) ADs shall repatriate the balances held in the Nostro collection account and arrange to
credit the respective exporter's account with a bank in Bangladesh on being confirmed that the
export proceeds have been swept and pooled into the Nostro collection account from the
exporter’s notional account.


Cont’d to page - 02

--- Page 2 ---
-02-

(e) ADs shall satisfy themselves as to the bona fide of the transactions on examination of
relevant documents and credit the amount, repatriated from the Nostro collection account, to the
exporter’s account on receipt of Form-C duly filled in. However, ERQ account of the exporter
may be credited up to the permissible limit of the total proceeds in accordance with the
instructions laid in chapter 13, section IV of Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions-
2009, Vol-1 (GFET). ADs shall also ensure deduction of applicable taxes, if any and payment
thereof.

Besides
reporting
the
transactions
to
Bangladesh
Bank
in
monthly
schedules/statements, ADs shall submit all the relevant information/documents relating to any
transaction under this arrangement to the Bangladesh Bank, as and when advised to do so.

(g) Each Nostro collection account shall be subject to reconciliation and audit on a
quarterly basis in terms of paragraph 7, chapter 4 of GFET.

(h) Resolution of all payment related complaints of exporters/service providers in
Bangladesh shall remain the responsibility of the OPGSP concerned.

(i). ADs entering into arrangement(s) with any OPGSP(s) shall report to the Foreign
Exchange Policy Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka with necessary details .

02. As usual, ADs shall exercise due diligence in respect of the transactions with OPGSPs
and comply with the foreign exchange regulations, AML/CFT regulations and any other relevant
laws/regulations in force.

Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of all concerned.


Yours faithfully,



(Md. Jahirul Hoque)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 7120375