--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
Web site: www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 06







Date: May 30, 2011

All Authorized Dealers of
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Inward remittances for providing Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) services

Attention of Authorized Dealers (ADs) is invited to Paragraph 23(b), Chapter 8 of Guidelines
for Foreign Exchange Transactions (GFET), Vol-1 (2009 Edition) in terms of which export of
computer software and data entry/data processing services in non-physical form such as V-Sat,
Internet or other electronic media does not require EXP procedure.

It is observed that Bangladesh is gradually becoming an offshore destination for BPO in
respect of IT services. Besides firms/companies, individuals may also provide services outsourced
by non-residents through internet. The payment against the services is normally due on delivery of
the services and it may not necessarily require documents for collection of export proceeds.
However, confusion arises as to whether existing regulations will be applicable for such services.
This is to clarify that services so provided by individuals will come within the purview of export in
non-physical form as per stipulation of the paragraph mentioned above. As such, ADs are free to
credit the proceeds of the inward remittance to the accounts of individual service providers subject to
observance of the following terms and conditions:

a) ADs shall satisfy themselves on examination of the relevant documents (such as e-mail
communication) and the message (such as SWIFT) relating to the inward remittance
that the payment has been received from the respective non-resident customers to
whom services have been delivered in accordance with specific arrangements;
b) ADs shall ensure that the individual beneficiaries have necessary capacities to provide
the underlying services;
c) ADs shall encash the inward remittance on receipt of Form-C duly filled in from the
individual beneficiaries;
d) ADs shall ensure deduction of applicable taxes, if any;
e) ADs shall exercise due diligence in respect of the transactions and comply with foreign
exchange regulations, AML/CFT standards and other relevant laws/regulations in
force; and
f) ADs shall keep records in support of the transactions and report the same in relevant
monthly schedules/statement to the Bangladesh Bank.

Please acknowledge receipt and bring the contents of this circular to the notice of all
concerned.

Yours faithfully,


(Md. Jahirul Hoque)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 7120375