--- Page 1 ---
Bangladesh Bank
(Central Bank of Bangladesh)
Website:www.bb.org.bd

Head Office
P.O Box-325
Dhaka
Department of Off-site Supervision



DOS Circular No.-02 Date: ----------------------------


Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Investment in Special Purpose Vehicle, Alternative Investment Fund
or similar fund/funds by the scheduled banks.

Your attention is drawn on the captioned subject. It has been decided that from now on scheduled
banks willing to invest in non-listed special purpose fund/funds (Special Purpose Vehicle,
Alternative Investment Fund or similar, stated as such fund(s) henceforth) which are registered with
Bangladesh Securities and Exchange Commission (BSEC) shall generally follow the guidelines
stated below:

1) The aggregate investment in such fund(s) made by any scheduled bank shall be limited
up to Tk. 2 (Two) billion.

2) Before making any firm commitment to investment in such fund(s), the investor bank
company shall have to apply for permission from Department of Off-site Supervision , Bangladesh
Bank (BB). Hence, a resolution duly passed in the Board describing the intention of investment in
such fund(s) along with the latest information regarding position of Capital, Liquidity, Asset &
Liability and other information as prescribed by BB from time to time shall have to be submitted by
the bank.

3) The investor bank company shall enter into an agreement with the trustee of such fund(s)
so that no investment shall be made by such fund(s) with any related party of the investor bank
company or no investment shall be made to purchase the share/debenture/bond or similar
instruments of the investor bank or no fund shall be deployed in such investment which constitutes
a financial claim over any other bank or financial institution in future certifying that no such
investment has already been made. The copy of this agreement shall be submitted to BB with
application as described in clause (2) above.

4) Investment in such fund(s) shall not be included in the Capital market investment, under
sub-section (1) of section 26Ka of the Bank-Company Act, 1991 (Amended up to 2013), of the
investor bank.
In the event of any conflict between the meaning of English Text and Bengali Text of this circular,
the Bengali Text shall prevail.
This policy shall come into force with immediate effect.

Please acknowledge receipt.
Yours Sincerely,

Sd/-

(S. M. Rabiul Hassan)
General Manager
Phone: 9530093
10 Agrahan, 1422
24 November, 2015