--- Page 1 ---
সাসটেইনেবল ফাইন্যান্স ডিপার্টমেন্ট Website: www.bb.org.bd

বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক
প্রধান কার্যালয়
ঢাকা।
রি eo: , ২২ অক্টোবর ২০২৩
এসএফডি সার্কুলার নং: ০৩ তারিখ: কিক 5555

ব্যবস্থাপনা পরিচালক/প্রধান নির্বাহী কর্মকর্তা
বাংলাদেশে কার্ধরত সকল তফসিলি ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠান

Sustainable Finance Policy প্রসঙ্গে

১। বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক কর্তৃক জারিকৃত এসএফডি সার্কুলার নং- ০৫, তারিখ: ৩০ ডিসেম্বর ২০২০ এর প্রতি আপনাদের দৃষ্টি আকর্ষণ
করা যাচ্ছে।

২। আর্থিক খাতে আন্তর্জাতিক স্ট্যান্ডার্ড নির্ধারণকারী সংস্থাসমূহের কার্যক্রমের ফলে পরিবেশবান্ধব ব্যাধকিং, জলবায়ু অর্থায়ন, কার্বন
ফাইন্যান্স, গ্রিনবন্ড ও টেকসই অর্থায়ন এবং 07২-এর প্রভাব পর্যালোচনা ও নীতি-পরামর্শ প্রণয়ন; বাংলাদেশ সরকারের ঘোষিত
বিভিন্ন কর্মপরিকল্পনা যেমন- Perspective Plan of Bangladesh 2010-2021, National Sustainable
Development Strategy, অষ্টম *eaf¥et পরিকল্পনা, Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
(INDCs), Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100, এবং Sustainable Development Goals প্রভৃতি বাস্তবায়নের
আবশ্যকতা বিবেচনায় নিয়ে বৃহৎ পরিসরে ব্যাংক ও আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহের জন্য প্রণীত “Sustainable Finance Policy”
জারি করা হয়।

৩। আলেচ্য পলিসিকে আরও যুগোপযোগী করার লক্ষ্যে gender aspect অন্তর্ভুক্তকরণ, বিদ্যমান List of Green
Products/Projects/Initiatives-t® পরিবর্ধন/পরিমার্জন, পরিবেশ সংরক্ষণ বিধিমালা ২০২৩, Mujib Climate
Prosperity Plan 2022-2041, National Adaptation Plan সহ সংশ্লিষ্ট বিষয়সমূহকে বিবেচনায় নিয়ে পরিবেশবান্ধব
ব্যাকিং ও জলবায়ু অর্থায়ন সম্পর্কিত বিষয়সমূহ অন্তর্ভুক্ত করে এ সার্কুলার জারি করা হলো যা এসএফডি সার্কুলার Ae ০৫/২০২০,
রিখ: ৩০ ডিসেম্বর ২০২০ এর স্থলে প্রতিস্থাপিত হবে |


০০

| এ সার্কুলারের সাথে সংযোজনী (Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions)
কুলারের অবিচ্ছেদ্য অংশ মর্মে গণ্য হবে।


৫ । ব্যাংক কোম্পানি আইন, ১৯৯১ এর ৪৫ ধারা এবং আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠান আইন, ১৯৯৩ এর ১৮(ছ) ধারায় প্রদত্ত ক্ষমতাবলে এ
নির্দেশনা জারি করা হ'ল, যা অবিলম্বে কার্যকর A |

আপনাদের বিশ্বস্ত,

সংযুক্তি: Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions (চৌধুরী লিয়াকত আলী)
পরিচালক (এসএফডি)
ফোন: ৯৫৩০৩২০

--- Page 2 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions



Sustainable Finance Policy
for
Banks and Financial Institutions












Bangladesh Bank
Sustainable Finance Department










October 2023

--- Page 3 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions


Preamble
Sustainability has become one of the mainstream considerations in the financial sector. There is,
however, a need for convergence on terminology among market participants and wider
stakeholders. The objective of Sustainable Finance Policy is to ensure the use of a common and
transparent language in Sustainable Finance arena. It has also been designed as a contribution to
other ongoing efforts in the financial industry to develop a consensus around key terms and
definitions in sustainable finance.
Sustainability in this context means the quality of not being harmful to the environment or
depleting natural resources, and thereby supporting long-term ecological, social balance and
governance (ESG). Bangladesh Bank (BB) has started the Sustainable Finance initiative to attain
the global targets set through the Paris Agreement and the broader United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). The idea behind this initiative is that the financial service sector,
Banks & FIs, as an important economic player, must make an appropriate contribution to
sustainability. BB as a pioneer financial regulatory body has been addressing sustainability
issues in its policies and regulations and guide Banks and FIs to accommodate Environmental,
Social and Governance (ESG) issues in their financing portfolio. Recognizing that the financial
sector can play a catalytic role in speeding up adoption of environment friendly output practices
in the real economy; BB has launched a comprehensive green banking initiative in 2011 to
support and promote environmentally responsible financing; issuing guidance inter alia for
environmental risk assessment of borrowing proposals and for greening of internal processes and
practices within banks and FIs. BB has defined Sustainable Finance through the Sustainable
Finance Policy in 2020. The Policy has not been confined to only Green Taxonomy but also
Sustainable Finance Taxonomy. Green Taxonomy includes green banking activities, green
finance, ESDD, utilization of Climate Risk Fund, internal environmental management including
climate financing, carbon footprint measurements, carbon financing, green marketing,
disclosures etc., whereas Sustainable Finance Taxonomy contains Sustainable Agriculture,
MSME, Socially Responsible Financing and identification process of sustainable linked finance,
R&D for sustainable product innovation, marketing, awareness, capacity building and
sustainable finance disclosure for banks & FIs etc.
There is a thirst for tracking and hunting new products/projects/initiatives through proper
justification. In this regard, the list of Green Products/Projects/Initiatives has been re-explored in
this policy.
In order to promote more inclusive and equitable approach to economic and environmental
development and to ensure gender equality, gender aspect has been addressed in this policy.
This policy has been designed to establish a framework prioritizing key initiatives that align with
sustainability objectives across environmental, social, economic, and governance dimensions in
accordance with various national and international frameworks, including SDGs, Perspective
Plan 2021-2041, 8th Five Year Plan, Vision 2041, Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
(INDCs), Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041, Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100, etc.

--- Page 4 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions


Table of Contents

Chapter-1: Sustainable Finance……………………………………………………………………
1.1 Introduction………………………………………………………………………………..
1.2 Rationale…………………………………………………………………………………...
1.3 Alignment of Sustainable Finance with SDGs and INDC…………………………………
1.4 Alignment with other national policies……………………………………………………
1.5 Alignment with International policies……………………………………………………
Chapter-2: Sustainable Finance Taxonomy………………………………………………………
12
2.1 Sustainable Finance………………………………………………………………………
12
2.2 Objectives/Focus/Purpose of Sustainable Finance Taxonomy…………………………….
12
2.3 Features of Sustainable Finance Taxonomy………………………………………………
12
2.3.1 Identification of Sustainable linked finance…………………………………………
13
2.3.1.1 Sustainable Agriculture………………………………………………………
13
2.3.1.2 Sustainable MSME……………………………………………………………
13
2.3.1.3 Socially Responsible Financing……………………………………….............
14
2.3.2 Identification of other Sustainable linked finance……………………………………
14
2.3.3 Screening and Monitoring……………………………………………………………
15
2.3.4 Inclusion of Technological Advancement……………………………………………
16
2.3.5 Sustainable Finance Strategic Planning, R&D for Product Innovation, Product
Marketing, Awareness and Capacity Building, Impact Assessment/ Review…………
17
2.3.6 Sustainable Finance Disclosure………………………………………………………
19
Chapter-3: Green Taxonomy………………………………………………………………………
20
3.1
Green Taxonomy……………………………………………………………………….
20
3.2
Objectives/Focus/Purpose of Green Taxonomy………………………………………..
20
3.3
Features of Green Taxonomy…………………………………………………..………
20

--- Page 5 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions


3.3.1 Green Banking…………………………………………………………………
21
3.3.2 Methodology of Defining Green Finance……………………………… …….
21
3.3.3 Identification Process of Green Products/Projects/Initiatives with Norms/
Benchmark/ Standards. ………………………………………………………..
22
3.3.3.1 List of Green Products/Projects/Initiatives applicable for Term Finance…
24
3.3.4 Policy Activities towards Green Environment…………………………………
27
3.3.5 Economic Activities for reducing negative impact of Environment…………...
29
3.3.6 Screening & Monitoring………………………………………………………..
29
3.3.7 Developing a Green Bond Standard……………………………………………
30
3.3.8 Green Investment………………………………………………………………
31
3.3.9 Greening the Polluting Industries………………………………………………
32
3.3.10 Climate Finance…………………………………………………………...……
33
3.3.10.1 Climate finance framework……………………………………………..
34
3.3.10.2 Objectives/focus/purpose of climate finance framework……………….
34
3.3.10.3 Identification of climate change adaptation finance……………………
36
3.3.10.4 Identification of climate change mitigation finance…………………….
37
3.3.10.5 Identification of climate change Loss & Damage (L&D) finance……...
38
3.3.10.6 Carbon Footprint Measurement & Carbon Finance……………………..
38
3.3.11 Technological Advancement for Inclusiveness in Green Activities and Green
Growth…………………………………………………………………………
40
3.3.12 Green Strategic Planning, R&D for Green Innovation, Product Marketing,
Awareness and Capacity Building, Green Impact Assessment /Review………
40
3.3.13 Green Finance Disclosure……………………………………………………
40
Chapter-4: Target, Rating & Rewards……………………………………………………………
41
4.1
Fixation of Green Finance Target and Sustainable Finance Target including Green
Finance…………………………………………………………………………………
41
4.2
Attainment of Green Finance and Sustainable Finance Target………………………
41

--- Page 6 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions


4.3
Sustainability Rating…………………………………………………………………
41
4.4
Compliance and Non-compliance……………………………………………………
41
4.5
Reward and Incentives…………………………………………………………………
41
Chapter-5: Exclusion List & Inclusion Criteria of Products/Projects/Initiatives for Sustainable
Finance……………………………..…………………………………………………..
42
5.1.
Exclusion List=> Ineligible for Finance………………………………………………..
42
5.2.
Exclusion List=> Ineligible for Sustainable Finance…………………………………
43
5.3.
Inclusion Criteria of Products/Projects/Initiatives for Sustainable Finance…………..
44
Conclusion…………………………………………………………………………………………
46
Annexure…………………………………………………………………………………………
47
Annexe-1: Characteristics of Green Featured Building……………………………………
47
Annexe-2: List of Applicable National Regulations and International Treaties…………
52

--- Page 7 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions


List of Abbreviations

ACC
Auto Cleaved Concrete
BaU
Business as Usual
BB
Bangladesh Bank
BCCSAP
Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan
BIFFL
Bangladesh Infrastructure Finance Fund Limited
BoD
Board of Directors
BDP
Bangladesh Delta Plan
BDT
Bangladeshi Taka
BREEAM
Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method
BSEC
Bangladesh Securities and Exchange Commission
CASBEE
Comprehensive Assessment System for Built Environment Efficiency
CBI
Climate Bonds Initiative
CCEs
Certified Carbon Emissions
CERs
Carbon Emission Reductions
CFF
Climate Fiscal Framework
CFP
Climate Fiscal Policy
CITES
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
CO2
Carbon dioxide
CO2e
Carbon dioxide equivalent
COP
Conference of the Parties
CSE
Chittagong Stock Exchange
CSR
Corporate Social Responsibility
CVF
Climate Vulnerable Forum
DoE
Department of Environment
DNSH
Do No Significant Harm
DSE
Dhaka Stock Exchange
ECA
Environment Conservation Act
ECR
Environmental Conservation Rules
EDGE
Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies
ERM
Environmental Risk Management
ESDD
Environmental and Social Due Diligence
ESG
Environmental, Social and Governance
ESRM
Environmental & Social Risk Management
ETP
Effluent Treatment Plant
EU
European Union
FIs
Financial Institutions
FCK
Fixed Chimney Kiln
GCF
Green Climate Fund

--- Page 8 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions



GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GHG
Green House Gas
GoB
Government of Bangladesh
GRI
Global Reporting Initiative
GRIHA
Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment
GTF
Green Transformation Fund
HDPE
High Density Poly Ethylene
HHK
Hybrid Hoffman Kiln
HQ
Head Quarter
HVAC
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
ICT
Information and Communication Technology
IDCOL
Infrastructure Development Company Limited
IDRA
Insurance Development and Regulatory Authority of Bangladesh
IEA
International Energy Agency
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IFS
Integrated Farming System
IMO
International Maritime Organization
INDC
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
IoT
Internet of Things
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRS
Integrated Recycling System
IT
Information Technology
LDC
Least Developed Country
LDPE
Low Density Poly Ethylene
LED
Light Emitting Diode
LEED
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
L&D
Loss and Damage
MANCOM
Management Committee
MCPP
Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan
MFI
Micro Credit Financial Institution
MoEFCC
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
MoI
Ministry of Industry
MRA
Micro Credit Regulatory Authority
MSME
Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises
NAP
National Adaptation Plan
NAPA
National Adaptation Programme of Action
NBR
National Board of Revenue
NDC
Nationally Determined Contributions
NGO
Non-Governmental Organizations
PFIs
Participating Financial Institutions
PP
Polypropylene

--- Page 9 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions


PPP
Public-private partnership
PS
Polystyrene
PV
Photovoltaic
PVC
Polyvinyl chloride
RE
Renewable Energy
R&D
Research and Development
RMC
Risk Management Committee
SDGs
Sustainable Development Goals
SFU
Sustainable Finance Unit
SMESPD
SME and Special Programs Department
SREDA
Sustainable and Renewable Energy Development Authority
SRF
Socially Responsible Finance
SWOT
Strength, Weakness, Opportunity and Threat
TDF
Technology Development/Upgradation Fund
ToR
Terms of Reference
UN
United Nations
UNDS
United Nations Development System
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNFCCC
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USD
US Dollar
USGBC
U.S. Green Building Council
VERs
Voluntary Carbon Emission Reductions

--- Page 10 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 1/54






1.1. Introduction
Chapter-1: Sustainable Finance

The definitions of Sustainable Finance in accordance with concerned international stakes such as
EU, UNEP and IFC look like the followings:
Sustainable finance generally refers to the process of taking due account of environmental,
social and governance (ESG) considerations when making investment decisions in the
financial sector. More specifically, environmental considerations may refer to climate
change mitigation and adaptation, as well as the environment more broadly, such as the
preservation of biodiversity, pollution prevention and circular economy. Social
considerations may refer to issues of inequality, inclusiveness, labor relations, investment
in human capital and communities, as well as human rights issues. The governance of
public and private institutions, including management structures, employee relations and
executive remuneration, plays a fundamental role in ensuring the inclusion of social and
environmental considerations in the decision-making process.
Sustainable finance looks at environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors in both
market practice and policy frameworks for banking, capital markets, investment and
insurance.
Sustainable Finance aims at introducing environmental, social, and governance standards,
as well as risk management to the lending practices of banks and FIs to promote stability
of financial systems in developing countries, and channel finance to responsible entities.
UNFCCC defined climate finance as part of Sustainable Finance as:
“Finance that aims at reducing emissions, and enhancing sinks of greenhouse gases and aims at
reducing vulnerability of, and maintaining and increasing the resilience of, human and ecological
systems to negative climate change impacts.”

--- Page 11 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 2/54



In brief, sustainable finance is the process of taking social, environmental, climatic, and
governance considerations into account when making investment decisions in the financial
sector, leading to more long-term investments in sustainable economic activities and projects.
Bangladesh Bank defines Sustainable Finance in a broader manner taking above definitions and
Bangladesh scenario in due consideration as well as in conformity with the international norms
and standards.
Sustainable finance refers to any form of financial service that includes investment, insurance,
banking, accounting, trading, economical and financial advice integrating environmental, social
and governance (ESG) criteria into the business or investment decisions for lasting benefits of
both clients and society at large. Sustainable Finance is about Green Banking, Sustainable
Agriculture, Sustainable MSME, CSR that includes Socially Responsible Finance activities with
respect to sustainability.








Sustainable Finance includes Green Finance or in other way Green Finance is a subset of a wider
definition of Sustainable Finance. It also includes a strong focus on gender-equality as a goal of
these policy platforms. Sustainable Finance Department of Bangladesh Bank has taken an
effort to prioritize the contribution towards sustainability with respect to environmental, social –
including gender equality, economic and governance issues those are in conformity with
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), Perspective Plans (2021-2041), recent 8th Five Year
Plan, Vision 2041, Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs), Mujib Climate
Prosperity
Plan
2022-2041,
Bangladesh
Delta
Plan
2100,
Govt.
issued
Rules/Regulations/Guidelines/Instructions/Notifications and nevertheless international benchmark
/norms /standard.

--- Page 12 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 3/54



1.2. Rationale
Sustainable Finance Policy is for sustainability considerations in order to mobilize finance
towards sustainable growth. Monetary Policy of Bangladesh Bank ingrains priority on Green
Finance as a part of Sustainable Finance. Sustainable Finance Policy has been formulated to
guide banks and FIs for their participation and contribution in the implementation of the INDCs
for attaining respective SDGs. In the INDC, Bangladesh is committed to reduce GHG emissions
by 6.73% unconditionally from Business as Usual (BaU) levels by 2030 or a conditional 15.12%
reduction in GHG emission from BaU levels by 2030. Sustainable Finance Policy has
incorporated target both for green finance and sustainable finance for the banks and FIs which is
linked to GHG emissions reductions and strengthened climate resilience as well.
Sustainable Finance is a work-stream to support the delivery on the objectives of Green
Products/Projects/Initiatives by channeling private investment into the transition to a climate-
neutral, climate-resilient, low-carbon, more resource-efficient, green, competitive and inclusive
sustainable economy. Sustainable Finance has a key role to play in mobilizing the necessary
capital to deliver on the policy objectives as national and international commitments on climate
and sustainability objectives. It has to go with the UN 2030 agenda and SDGs and the Paris
Climate Agreement. It has to go with the 8th 5YR plan and other perspective plans.
The Conventions of the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement call for financial assistance
from member countries with more financial resources to those that are less endowed and more
vulnerable. This recognizes that the contribution of countries to climate change and their
capacity to prevent it and cope with its consequences vary enormously.

1.3. Alignment of Sustainable Finance with SDGs and INDC
SDG
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is a global call to action to end poverty, protect the
earth’s environment and climate, and ensure that people everywhere can enjoy peace and
prosperity.
The UN and its partners in Bangladesh are working towards achieving the SDGs: 17
interconnected Goals which address the major development challenges faced by people in
Bangladesh and around the world. In line with 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
UN Development System Reform (UNDS), the UN agencies in Bangladesh have been working
together in a new and coherent way to support government to implement the SDGs and to
enhance the development impact. The UN in Bangladesh has been supporting the government
as one of development partners in various projects in the field of sustainable development
solutions, poverty alleviation, disaster management, peace, good governance, police reform,
human rights, environment, climate change, reproductive health, family planning, population,
children & mother’s development, immunization, maternal and child nutrition, food security,
adolescence, youth development, empowerment of women, education, literacy, culture,
communication, heritage, labour standards and employment, migration, refugees, drugs and
crime, industrial development, capacity development, project services, peacekeeping,

--- Page 13 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 4/54



volunteerism, counter-terrorism, agricultural development, health care and research, HIV-AIDS,
trade, atomic energy, inclusive finance transformation, infrastructure and resilience, human
settlement and communication and advocacy services. Goal 13 of SDG is on climate action to
combat climate change and its impacts including mobilization of climate finance.

Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), 2015, 2021
In anticipation of reaching an agreement at COP21, Parties were invited to communicate their
post-2020 climate change adaptation and mitigation targets and commitments ahead of the
conference through Intended National Determined Contributions (INDCs). This represented
significant progress, as more than 190 developed and developing countries submitted emission
reduction and adaptation commitments in the form of INDCs during 2015. For most countries,
INDCs define GHG emission reduction targets in the energy, industry, agriculture, waste, land
use and forestry, and transport sectors for 2020–2030, but the sectoral focus and time frames
vary from country to country. When countries formally ratify the Paris Agreement, their INDCs
are converted into their NDC, unless the Party expressly states otherwise.
NDCs are at the heart of the Paris Agreement and the achievement of these long-term goals.
NDCs embody efforts by each country to reduce national emissions and adapt to the impacts of
climate change. The Paris Agreement (Article 4, paragraph 2) requires each Party to prepare,
communicate and maintain successive NDCs that it intends to achieve. Parties shall pursue
domestic mitigation measures, with the aim of achieving the objectives of such contributions.
NDCs are submitted every five years to the UNFCCC secretariat. In order to enhance the
ambition over time the Paris Agreement provides that successive NDCs will represent a
progression compared to the previous NDC and reflect its highest possible ambition. Parties
already submitted their updated NDC by 2021. Bangladesh also submitted its updated NDC in
August, 2021 and to meet the unconditional NDC it needs 20 billion USD and conditional
NDC, it needs 125 billion USD up to 2030.
Parties are requested to submit the next round of NDCs (new NDCs or updated NDCs) in five
years thereafter (e.g. 2025, 2030), regardless of their respective implementation time frames.
Estimation of financial needs to implement the NDC and the sources of financing are important
aspects of every NDCs.
Bangladesh has already completed many significant upfront activities for starting the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) implementation. The responsibilities of ministries and agencies
against each goal and target of the 2030 Agenda have been mapped out. Bangladesh is also one
of the signatory parties which outlined what post-2020 climate actions they intended to take as
part of INDCs under Paris Agreement to reduce global average temperature and to achieve net
zero emissions. Accordingly, Sustainable Finance Components and Sectors under this policy
have been aligned with relevant goals and targets of SDGs and INDC’s commitment of
Bangladesh in the following manner:

--- Page 14 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 5/54



SDGs
SDGs
Targets
Sustainable
Finance
Components
Sustainable Finance
Sectors
INDC of
Bangladesh
1.3, 1.4,
Sustainable 1. Sustainable
Agriculture
2. Sustainable
MSME
3. Socially
Responsible
Finance
1. Mitigation
contribution:
 Reduction of
GHG emissions
by 6.73% by
2030 in the
power, transport
and industry
sectors
(unconditional)
 Reduction of
GHG emissions
by 15.12% by
2030 in the
power, transport
and industry
sectors
(conditional)
2. Adaptation
component:
 To protect the
population, enhance
their adaptive
capacity and
livelihood options,
and to protect the
overall
development of the
Bangladesh in its
stride for economic
progress and
wellbeing of the
people.
1.5, 1.b,
2.3, 5.a,
6.1, 8.1,
Linked
Finance
8.2, 8.3,
8.9, 9.2,
9.3


6.3, 6.4,
Other
Sustainable
Linked
Finance
1.Low
Risk
Rated
Projects/Initiatives using
ESDD checklist (other
than
Green
Finance,
Sustainable
Agriculture,
Sustainable MSME, SRF
and Working capital and
demand loan of Green
Products)
2.Working
capital
and
demand loan of Green
Products/
projects/
initiatives
7.2, 7.3,
7.a, 8.1,
8.4, 8.5,
9.2, 9.3,
9.4, 10.2,
10.3,10.4,
12.5,
13.2,
13.a,
14.1,14.2,
14.4,14.5,
14.6,14.a,
14.c,
17.14,
17.17,
17.18
Green
Finance
1. Renewable Energy
2. Energy & Resource
Efficiency
3. Alternative Energy
4. Liquid Waste Management
5. Solid Waste Management
6. Circular Economy & Eco-
Projects Financing
7. Environment Friendly
Brick Production
8. Green/ Environment
Friendly Establishments
9. Green Agriculture
10. Green CMSME
11. Green SRF
12. Blue Economy Financing
13. Information and
Communication
Technology
14. Miscellaneous
Green
Investment
1. Green
Bond/Green SUKUK
2. Impact Fund
(linked to Sustainability)

--- Page 15 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 6/54




1.4. Alignment with other national policies
Perspective plan (2021 - 2041)
The Perspective Plan 2021-2041 has been prepared to translate the policies and programmes
enshrined in the Vision 2041 into development strategies. This document is the development
vision of the government of a prosperous Bangladesh, a strategic description of the goals and
objectives and a roadmap for its implementation. Perspective Plan 2021-2041 will be a
landmark document over the next twenty years as it paves for Bangladesh the way of becoming
an upper middle income country by 2031 and a prosperous country by 2041 in the platinum
jubilee of its birth. The strategic goals and milestones of the plan include industrialization with
export-oriented manufacturing; paradigm shifts in agriculture to enhance productivity, a service
sector of the future-providing the bridge for the transformation of the rural agrarian economy to
a primarily industrial and digital economy; the urban transition - an essential part of the strategy
to move to a high-income economy primarily motivated by the agenda of the government -“our
village, our town”; efficient energy and infrastructure; building a Bangladesh resilient to climate
change and other environmental challenges; and establishing Bangladesh as a knowledge hub.

8th Five Year Plan, 2021-2025
The 8th five year plan is the latest five year plan of Bangladesh encompassing years from 2021-
2025. It particularly gives emphasis to integrate environmental, climatic and other social issues
into the planning and development process.

Delta plan, 2100
The GoB has formulated a comprehensive development plan - the Bangladesh Delta Plan (BDP,
2100), focusing on economic growth, environmental conservation, and enhanced climate
resilience. The plan lays out holistic and cross-sectoral action needed to improve productivity
and minimize disaster risks. Implementing BDP, 2100 goals will require a sustained and long-
term effort. These included managing investments; aligning the planning, implementation, and
financing process; improving inter-agency and inter-sectoral coordination. Addressing the
issues of water sector and climate change are important aspects of BDP 2100 and these sectors
have strong linkage with the issues of sustainability.

BCCSAP, 2009
The Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP) is a strategic document of
GoB covering climate change adaptation, mitigation, and loss & damage. It sets out 44
Programmes to be taken by Bangladesh over the short, medium, and long term within six
strategic areas – food security, social protection and health; comprehensive disaster management;
infrastructure; research and knowledge management; mitigation and low carbon development;
and capacity building and institutional strengthening. BCCSAP highlighted the importance of
exploring the source of climate finance to address all the issues of climate change mentioned in
the BCCSAP 2009.

--- Page 16 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 7/54



National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) 2005, 2009
The purpose of the NAPA is the development of a countrywide programme that encompasses the
immediate and urgent adaptation activities that addresses the current and anticipated adverse
effects of climate change, including extreme events. The goal of the NAPA is the provision of a
framework to guide the coordination and implementation of adaptation initiatives in the country,
through a participatory approach and building synergies with related programmes. To implement
the projects and programmes sustainably, Bangladesh needs to generate huge amount financial
resources.

National Adaptation Plan of Bangladesh (2023-2050)
Bangladesh has prepared its National Adaptation Plan (NAP) under the leadership of MoEFCC.
It tries to cover every sector linked with climate change adaptation including the financial
sector. Bangladesh NAP highlighted the importance of sustainability in terms of the strength
and the life span of the different activities under the NAP. For implementation of NAP up to
2050, Bangladesh needs 230 billion USD. Financial resources including sustainable finance
could be the most important window to implement the project/programme under NAP. BB is
aligning its Green Bond Financing policy with NAP.

The Bangladesh Climate Fiscal Framework (CFF) 2014, 2020
The CFF, published by the Ministry of Finance, provides principles and tools for climate fiscal
policy-making (CFP), helping to identify the demand and supply sides of climate fiscal funds
(expenditures vis-à-vis revenue or finance, respectively), and to ensure that CFF is transparent
and sustainable in the longer term.
The CFF determines:
The equitable division of climate funds and their allocation to relevant sectors
The division of services, identification of the demand for climate fund, and expenditure areas
of financial authority for raising revenue, for national and international financing options, and
for fiscal tools
A governance framework for climate change funds under national fiscal policy
The CFF also recommends a set of climate codes designed to (i) track climate change
expenditures for policy analysis and reporting, and (ii) estimate long-term climate finance needs
by identifying potential climate-related public expenditures across government ministries. The
Bangladesh Climate Fiscal Framework 2020 has been developed as an updated version of
Climate Fiscal Framework 2014 by Finance Division.

Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan 2022-2041
The Mujib Climate Prosperity Plan (MCPP) includes a number of ambitious new and
strengthened adaptation efforts to build resilience in populations and ecosystems through
investment this decade to contribute to 2041 outcomes. Minimizing and averting climate-
induced losses and damages is also an international financing priority of this Plan. The
MCPP was launched under Bangladesh’s second tenure as president of the Climate

--- Page 17 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 8/54



Vulnerable Forum (CVF). It works to counteract climate induced damage and losses by
equipping vulnerable communities, industry, and the government with the Mujib vision
supported by optimized financing tools and models that will be key to the new risk
management paradigm to bring about resilience and stability, especially for small
businesses, vulnerable populations, and the economy.
The MCPP expects investment opportunities in resilient pathways including energy, water,
transport, supply chains and agriculture value chains, to reach USD 90 billion over the next
decade. Optimized financing structures to attract foreign direct investment and mobilize
domestic private sector capital include the use of public-private partnerships (PPP) as a key
solution to climate investment. Different tools to incentivize investment in low-carbon and
climate resilient infrastructure, including preferential refinancing rates, differentiated capital
requirements such as a fossil fuel penalizing factor commensurate with risk and higher
capital requirements for non-low-carbon and non-climate-resilient projects can be used by
financial sector. The MCPP aims 30% optimal variable RE by 2030, lower energy intensity
by 20% by 2030, and 40% RE by 2041. It also aims US$ 10 billion in RE generation by
2030, US$ 1.7 billion fossil fuel subsidy savings by 2030, around 12000 jobs by 2025 and
around 40000 jobs by 2030.
1.5. Alignment with International Policies
Environmental and Social safeguard policy of GCF
In carrying out its mandate of promoting a paradigm shift towards low-emission and climate-
resilient development pathways in the context of sustainable development, GCF effectively and
equitably manages environmental and social risks and impacts and improve outcomes of all
GCF financed activities. This is facilitated by a set of management processes and procedures
that allow GCF to identify, analyze, avoid, minimize, and mitigate any potential adverse
environmental and societal impacts of its activities, to maximize environmental and social
benefits, and to consistently improve the environmental and societal performance of GCF and
its activities over time. This system of processes and procedures is an overarching framework
for improving environmental and societal outcomes while addressing any unintended adverse
impacts of GCF-financed activities. GCF incorporates environmental and societal
considerations into its decision-making and operations and identifies opportunities to “do good”
and improve environmental and societal outcomes. The GCF Environment and Social Policy is
an essential element of this system, elaborating the commitment of GCF to integrate
environmental and social issues into its decision-making and outcomes, and establishes the
principles, requirements, and responsibilities to deliver on these commitments. Through this
policy, GCF will require that all GCF-supported activities will commit to enhancing equitable
access to development benefits; and giving due consideration to vulnerable populations, groups,
and individuals (including women, children, and people with disabilities, and people
marginalized by virtue of their sexual orientation or gender identity), local communities,
indigenous peoples, and other marginalized groups of people and individuals that are affected or
potentially affected by GCF-financed activities.

--- Page 18 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 9/54



United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 1992
The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March 1994. Today, it has near-universal membership.
The 198 countries that have ratified the Convention are called Parties to the Convention.
Preventing “dangerous” human interference with the climate system is the ultimate aim of the
UNFCCC.

The UNFCCC secretariat is the United Nations entity tasked with supporting the global
response to the threat of climate change. The Convention is the parent treaty of the 2015 Paris
Agreement. The main aim of the Paris Agreement is to ensure the global average temperature
increase in this century is as close as possible to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels.
The UNFCCC is also the parent treaty of the Kyoto Protocol, 1997. The ultimate objective of all
three agreements under the UNFCCC is to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the
atmosphere at a level that will prevent dangerous human interference with the climate system,
within a time frame which allows ecosystems to adapt naturally and enables sustainable
development. Article 11 of the UNFCCC and article 9 of the Paris Agreement described about
the financial mechanism and modalities of climate financing instrument both for adaptation and
mitigation. Sustainable finance and climate finance guideline should have direct linkage with
the financial mechanism of UNFCCC and the article 9 of the Paris Agreement.

Kyoto protocol, 1997
The Kyoto Protocol was adopted on 11 December 1997. Owing to a complex ratification
process, it entered into force on 16 February 2005. Currently, there are 192 Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol. In short, the Kyoto Protocol operationalize the UNCCC by committing industrialized
countries and economies in transition to limit and reduces greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in
accordance with agreed individual targets. The Convention itself only asks those countries to
adopt policies and measures on mitigation and to report periodically. The Kyoto Protocol is
based on the principles and provisions of the Convention and follows its annex-based structure.
It only binds developed countries, and places a heavier burden on them under the principle of
“common but differentiated responsibility and respective capabilities”, because it recognizes
that they are largely responsible for the current high levels of GHG emissions in the
atmosphere.

The Kyoto Protocol sets binding emission reduction targets for 37 industrialized countries and
economies in transition and the European Union. Overall, these targets add up to an average 5
per cent emission reduction compared to 1990 levels over the five year period 2008–2012 (the
first commitment period).In Doha, Qatar, on 8 December 2012, the Doha Amendment to the
Kyoto Protocol was adopted for a second commitment period, starting in 2013 and lasting until
2020. As of 28 October 2020, 147 Parties deposited their instrument of acceptance; therefore,
the threshold of 144 instruments of acceptance for entry into force of the Doha Amendment was
achieved. The amendment entered into force on 31 December 2020.

One important element of the Kyoto Protocol was the establishment of flexible market

--- Page 19 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 10/54



mechanisms, which are based on the trade of emissions permits. Under the Protocol, countries
must meet their targets primarily through national measures. However, the Protocol also offers
them an additional means to meet their targets by way of three market-based mechanisms.
Kyoto Protocol facilitates the financing for climate change adaptation by supporting the
Adaptation Fund.

The Paris Agreement, 2015
In December 2015, at the 21st Conference of Parties (COP21) to the UNFCCC, Parties to the
UNFCCC adopted the Paris Agreement, a global framework to tackle climate change. Through
the Paris Agreement, all Parties acknowledged the need to contribute to achieving ambitious
and collective goals to fight climate change. The Paris Agreement is the result of almost a
decade of negotiations under the UNFCCC. A formal mandate was adopted in Durban in 2011
to “develop a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the
Convention applicable to all Parties.”

The Paris Agreement entered rapidly into force on 4 November 2016, within a year from its
adoption in December 2015. This represents an unprecedented accomplishment for an
international environmental agreement and marks a unique experience for UN treaties. It
reinforces the renewed global commitment to addressing climate change and acknowledges the
importance of countries place on an international framework. The mitigation goals of the Paris
Agreement are set out in Article 2, to hold the increase in global average temperature to well
below 2 degrees Celsius (°C) above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit it to
1.5°C; and Article 4, to reach a balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources and
removals of sinks of greenhouse gases (GHG) in the second half of the century, sometimes
referred to as net zero emissions or carbon neutrality. The Paris Agreement also aims to increase
Parties’ ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change, foster climate resilience and
low GHG emissions development, and make finance flows consistent with a pathway toward
low GHG emissions and climate resilient development.

The Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) Standards
The GRI Standards are a modular system comprising three series of standards: the GRI
Universal Standards, the GRI Sector Standards, and the GRI Topic Standards. These standards
reflect global best practice for sustainability reporting, helping organizations respond to
emerging information demands from stakeholders and regulators. These standards also help
understand and reporting format to exhibit on the impacts on the economy and on environment
and people in a comparable and credible way over time and in relation to other organizations,
thus increases transparency on contribution to the sustainable development. Institutions can use
the Standards to report on the impacts in a credible way that is comparable. The Standards also
help stakeholders and authorities understand the report of the organization and can use the
information in multiple ways. For example, the GRI Topic Standards contain disclosures for
providing information on topics on sustainable finance and its impacts on society, economy
climate and environment.

--- Page 20 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 11/54



The UN global Compact
United Nations Global Compact simultaneously provides a policy platform and a practical
framework for creating a sustainable and inclusive global economy with the alignment of
business operations and strategies with ten universally accepted principles in the areas of human
rights, labour, environment and anti-corruption. They address environmental risks and leverage
opportunities; manage social impact and opportunities affecting employees; support the
economic development of the country; and ensure sustainable development.

--- Page 21 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 12/54



Green
Taxonomy
Sustainable
Finance
Disclosure
Identification of
Sustainable Linked
Agriculture,
MSME, Socially
Responsible
Finance
Impact
Assessment
/Review
Sustainable
Finance
Taxonomy
Identification
of other
Finance linked
to sustainability
R&D for
Sustainable Product
Innovation,
Marketing,
Awareness &
Capacity Building
Inclusion of
Technological
Advancement
Sustainable
Finance
Strategic
Planning
Screening &
Monitoring
Chapter-2: Sustainable Finance Taxonomy
2.1 Sustainable Finance
Taxonomy means classification of Sustainable Finance. It is a structured mechanism for
identifying and recognizing a product/a project/an initiative belongs to green and other products
of Agriculture, MSME or Socially Responsible Financing Category linked to sustainability.
Sustainable Finance Taxonomy includes not only Green Taxonomy but also Sustainable Finance
Policy including CSR Policy, Economic and Governance (Good Governance and Green
Governance), Green Finance based on (i) Climate Change Mitigation (ii) Climate Change
Adaptation (iii) Other Environmentally sustainable Implementations and Impact on Inclusive
Sustainable Green Growth.
2.2 Objectives/Focus/Purpose of Sustainable Finance Taxonomy

Sustainable finance taxonomy has been structured in this Sustainable Finance Policy incorporating
a green taxonomy containing green finance policy, CSR, SRF, agriculture and MSME all these
issues related to green and sustainability. Sustainable finance frameworks are crucial for making
future development more sustainable. Forming Sustainable Finance Taxonomy are very much
essential and within the broader scope of sustainable development agenda of a country like
Bangladesh. The policy actions and operations have been included in the taxonomy to provide a
comprehensive understanding for concerned stakeholders regarding sustainable finance.

2.3 Features of Sustainable Finance Taxonomy

--- Page 22 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 13/54




Sustainable Agriculture
2.3.1 Identification of Sustainable linked finance
Sustainable MSME
Socially Responsible Finance
2.3.1.1 Sustainable Agriculture

Finance to Sustainable Agriculture is linked to Sustainable Finance. Sustainable Finance
aims at promoting Sustainable Agriculture through climate change adaptation measures.
Agriculture productivity needs to be enhanced especially in rain-fed areas focusing on
integrated farming, soil health management, and synergizing resource conservation.
Conservation agriculture by promoting location specific integrated/composite farming
systems; soil and moisture conservation measures; comprehensive soil health management
and rain-fed technologies can make agriculture sector more productive, sustainable,
remunerative, and climate resilient. All these components of conservation agriculture have
significant role in achieving SDGs.
Sustainable Agriculture Sectors\Areas
Crops
ii. Pisciculture
iii. Crop Storage
iv. Livestock
Poverty Alleviation
vi. Irrigation Tools
vii. Agricultural Tools
viii. Others (time-to-time as recognized by BB)
Along with the aforementioned products, financing for Integrated Farming System (IFS) in
the specific sectors like horticulture, livestock, fishery, agro-forestry, apiculture etc. to
enable farmers not only in maximizing farm returns for sustaining livelihood, but also to
mitigate the impacts of drought, flood or other extreme weather events with the income
opportunity from allied activities during crop damage.

2.3.1.2 Sustainable MSME

Finance to Sustainable MSME (micro, small & medium as defined by SMESPD, BB) is
linked to Sustainable Finance. Inclusive Sustainable Finance in MSME aims to advance
financial inclusion among the most vulnerable by building resilience and enabling mitigation
to climate change. This is especially the case for the transition to a low-carbon, circular and
sustainable economy. Banks and FIs should have targeted initiatives to scale up finance for
MSMEs, with a focus on specific sustainable/inclusive sectors. Sustainable linked MSME
financing decisions upon environmental, social and governance (ESG) considerations will
address issues of inequality, inclusiveness, investment in human capital and communities
with respect to preservation of biodiversity, pollution prevention and circular economy.
Banks and FIs should set priority areas financing to Sustainable MSME concentrating on
Women entrepreneur based project financing, Rural Based business enterprises project

--- Page 23 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 14/54



financing, New entrepreneur project financing, Cluster Based project financing, Agricultural
product processing industry, Helpless/ distressed/underprivileged/Marginal group/area-based
project
financing,
Project
Financing
for
the
sustainability
of
Third
gender,
Physically/Mentally challenged person, Tribal people etc.
A. Sustainable MSME industries/projects
 Low Risk Rated (as per ESDD) Micro, Small and Medium enterprises
financing with special focus to:
(i) Herbal cosmetic manufacturing industries
(ii) 100% local ingredients-based milk processing industry
(iii) Handicrafts, Handloom and alike
(iv) Agro feed manufacturing industry
(v) Jute made products manufacturing industry
(vi) Unani/Ayurvedic/Homeopathic manufacturing industries
(vii) Rice processing industry
(viii) Agro equipment manufacturing industry
(ix) Production of bio pesticide, production of organic fertilizer
(x) Bran wood projects
(xi) Horticulture processing industry

2.3.1.3 Socially Responsible Financing
Finance to Socially Responsible Products/Projects/Initiatives/Sectors is linked to
Sustainable Finance. Socially Responsible Finance (SRF) is financing that supports actions
mitigating or addressing a specific social issue and/or seeking to achieve positive social
outcomes especially but not exclusively for a target population(s). SRF project categories
include but are not limited to, providing and/or promoting affordable basic infrastructure,
access to essential services (such as health and healthcare), affordable housing, employment
generation through the potential effect of SME financing and microfinance, food security,
and socioeconomic advancement and empowerment.
Socially Responsible activities/projects linked to Sustainable Finance
i. Financing/Investment through MFI (MRA Regulated)/NGO (Govt. Approved)
Linkage Mode for capacity building, Education, employment generation including
self employment
ii. Financing in trading of green and agro products using ICT/online/e-business platform
(as recognized by BB)
iii. Financing in Orphanage/Child Rehabilitation Center/Old Age Home
2.3.2 Identification of other Sustainable linked finance
1. Low Risk Rated Projects/Initiatives using ESDD checklist (other than Green Finance,
Sustainable Agriculture, Sustainable MSME, SRF and Working capital and demand
loan of Green Products)
2. Working capital and demand loan of Green Products/projects/initiatives

--- Page 24 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 15/54



Project that involves activities listed under
Exclusion
List=>
Ineligible
for
Sustainable Finance
Screening
2.3.3 Screening and Monitoring
2.3.3.1 Screening
Setting of screening criteria is essential to avoid significant harm to climate change
mitigation and adaptation, and to environmental and social harmony. The technical
screening criteria will determine whether an activity can be considered to substantially
contribute to one of the following six environmental objectives not doing any significantly
harm to the other environmental objectives.

Six environmental objectives-
Climate change mitigation
ii.
Climate change adaptation
iii.
Sustainable protection of water and marine resources
iv.
Transition to a circular economy, waste prevention and recycling
Pollution prevention and control
vi.
Protection and restoration of biodiversity and healthy ecosystems
Performance thresholds-
1) Make a substantive contribution to one of six environmental objectives
2) Do No Significant Harm (DNSH) to the other five, where relevant;
3) Meet minimum social and governance safeguards

2.3.3.2 Steps of Screening
All loan proposals will have to be first screened against the exclusion list.












Yes
Project that involves activities
listed under Exclusion List=>
Ineligible for Finance
Application of ESDD risk assessment tool
as per ESRM guidelines along with Credit
Risk Management guidelines issued by BB
No
Yes
Finance will
be rejected

--- Page 25 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 16/54



2.3.3.3 Monitoring
Monitoring must move on in a structured manner immediately after asset creation by the
banks and FIs for the maintenance of the standard quality of the assets. Screening on
Environmental, Social and Governance issue is essential for the pre-evaluation of a project
with respect to sustainability, but the permanence in sustainability will only be ensured if
stricter monitoring in both offsite and onsite manner is carried on with regular intervention.
The purpose of monitoring a client's ESG performance (on the basis of ESDD risk
assessment tool as per ESRM guideline) is to assess existing and emerging ESG risks
associated with a client's operations during the transaction. Once a finance proposal has
been approved, the Bank/FI needs to monitor the client’s ongoing compliance with the ESG
clauses stipulated in the legal agreement. The monitoring process generally involves a
review of periodic ESG performance reports submitted by the client and regular site visits of
the client’s operations. Special attention should be paid to:
 Assessing implementation of any mitigation measures specified in the corrective action plan
 Monitoring for valid ESG permits or licenses
 Any fines and penalties for non-compliance with ESG regulations
 Recent reports from the relevant regulator or inspection authority confirming compliance with
specified laws, including any emissions measurements proving that emissions are below the
permitted limits
 ESG occurrences including major accidents or incidents associated with a client’s operations
such as worker injuries and spills
 Media attention to ESG issues related to the client
 Any complaints submitted by stakeholders about a client
If Bank/FI staff identifies ESG issues, such as a client’s non-compliance with the ESG
clauses stipulated in the legal agreement, they should follow up with the client to resolve the
issues without undue delay.

2.3.4 Inclusion of Technological Advancement
Minimization of waste, emissions and reduction in materials and energy inputs are the most
important environmental aims. Sustainable technological advancement and innovations
have been playing a major role in the long-term initiation of sustainable production which
ultimately facilitates sustainable growth. Sustainable finance taxonomy features include
financing for the inclusion of technological advancement and innovations leading to
sustainable production including Green Production or not yet recognized as green but
definitely a sustainable one.
Financing for technological inclusion and featured machineries/technologies include the
followings-
Core manufacturing/production
ii.
Energy efficiency and renewable energy
iii.
Business process engineering/Business process automation
iv.
Operations management

--- Page 26 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 17/54



Waste management
vi.
Air management
vii.
Heat management
viii.
Working environment (fire defense and health care)
ix.
Water use management
Human resources development and management
xi.
Accounting, inventory management, marketing, sales and security
management automation

2.3.5 Sustainable Finance Strategic Planning, R&D for Product Innovation,
Product Marketing, Awareness and Capacity Building, Impact Assessment/
Review
2.3.5.1 Formation of Sustainable Finance Committee
 Committee formation1
 Developing Terms of Reference (ToR)
 Establishing Sustainable Finance Unit (SFU)
 Establishing Dedicated Sustainable Finance Help Desk2
2.3.5.2 Linking of Banks’/FIs’ Vision, Mission and Objectives with Sustainability
 Economic contribution
 Environmental contribution
 Social contribution
 Governance (Good Governance, Green Governance)
2.3.5.3 Developing Sustainable Finance Policy
Banks/FIs will develop their own Sustainable Finance Policy which must be approved by
the competent authority. Board’s approval will be required upon the RMC’s approach in
case of all scheduled commercial banks. Regional Office or MANCOM’s approval is
required for foreign banks operating in Bangladesh. Sustainable Finance Policy of a Bank/FI
must be in conformity with the Sustainable Finance Policy of Bangladesh Bank. Banks and
FIs can go for more sophisticated model and develop further as they progress.
2.3.5.4 Identification and evaluation of funding sources
 Bank’s/FI’s own fund
 BB support funds
 Development partners’ fund

2.3.5.5 Time Bound Action Plan
 Assessment of business portfolio in conformity with regulatory requirement
 Setting of phase-wise financing targets

1 SFD Circular No-02/2016
2 SFD Circular Letter No-05/2020 & 02/2022

--- Page 27 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 18/54



2.3.5.6 Research and Development
 Product Innovation
 Assessing areas of sustainable finance
 Analysis of market demand and supply
 Proposition for products/projects

 Gender Inclusiveness
 Improve quality and availability of sex-disaggregated data
 Conduct a periodic mapping of BB’s contribution to gender based finance
 Conduct baseline assessment at banks and FIs to identify current gaps and
opportunities related to gender financing, including a definition of gender finance
 Increase availability of and access to financial products, including digitally enabled
solutions for women and women-owned/-led MSMEs
 Improve other financial infrastructure, such as collateral registries and factoring
platforms
 Incentivize banks and FIs to develop gender policies and products and services that
meet women’s needs
 Facilitate information exchange roundtables on gender-related topics.
2.3.5.7 Marketing
A Bank or a Financial Institution must broaden their product portfolio considering product
to product area approach involving/engaging, potential borrowers, suppliers, service
providers, associations, different chambers of commerce and surroundings. In this way banks
and FIs will be able to build an effective database of product based potential borrowers,
suppliers, service providers, associations and chambers, vendors, manufacturers, certified
energy auditors and concerns for a better contribution to green business and green economy.
2.3.5.8 Awareness and Capacity Building
Awareness and Capacity Building for Sustainable Finance including Green Finance, Green
Banking and Sustainable CSR activities as a part of Sustainable Finance is a must for all
concerns and needs to be ensured by the SFU with the support from the competent authority
(BoD/Regional Office or MANCOM of Foreign Commercial Bank). Awareness and
Capacity Building for sustainable financing including green products/projects/initiatives will
be moving on parallel with Marketing for Green and Sustainable Products. Banks and FIs
will arrange events/programs involving all management level executives/officials (head
office, zonal/regional office, branches, units, Sustainable Finance Dedicated Helpdesks),
customers, entrepreneurs’ associations, suppliers and service providers for following
capacity building initiatives:

 Developing time bound action plan that addresses-
 Information dissemination and awareness building
 Training/seminar/workshop and knowledge sharing session

--- Page 28 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 19/54



 Maintaining training calendar
 Establishing Knowledge Hub
 Conducting gender diagnostics and awareness sessions across all levels, including
training on how to apply a gender lens in green finance and how to conduct gender
impact assessments.
 Facilitating information exchange roundtables on gender-related topics.
 Providing technical assistance and support for gender-sensitive operations.

2.3.5.9 Impact Assessment & Review
 Assessment of asset quality
 Assessment of environmental, social and economic contribution of projects/initiatives
 Assessment of governance issue
 Review of achievement/attainment of bank’s/FI’s own target and regulatory target
 Revision of the strategy

2.3.6 Sustainable Finance Disclosure
Banks and Financial Institutions should disclose the initiatives/practices taken by them time
to time in their respective websites. The following disclosure should be made and updated
by all Banks and FIs:

Banks/FIs should start publishing independent Sustainability Report as the
standard set by BB
ii.
Updated and detailed information regarding Banks’/FIs’ environmental activities
and performances of major clients should be disclosed.
iii.
Banks/FIs shall keep their annual reports and websites updated with the
disclosures on Sustainable Financing initiatives/activities.
iv.
Banks/FIs should incorporate a section/dropdown/tab for their existing Sustainable
products/projects/initiatives in their website.
A customer complaint/feedback option should be in their website for any query in
this regard.
vi.
Brief information regarding BB Support Funds should be disclosed on the website
in a displayable tab.

--- Page 29 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 20/54



Methodology of
Defining Green
Finance
R&D for Green Product
Innovation, Green
Impact Assessment/
Review
Green Marketing,
Awareness & Capacity
Building
Green
Taxonomy
Green Strategic
Planning
Developing a Green
Bond Standard
Greening the
Polluting Industries

Climate Finance
Technological
Advancement
Identification Process of
Green Products/ Projects
/Initiatives with Norms/
benchmark/Standards
Screening & Monitoring
Economic Activities for
reducing negative impact
of Environment
Policy Activities towards
Green Environment
Green Finance
Disclosure
Green Banking

Chapter-3: Green Taxonomy
3.1 Green Taxonomy is a structured mechanism for identifying and recognizing a product/a
project/an initiative as a green one through a set of activities belong to some green featured
applications.
3.2 Objectives/Focus/Purpose of Green Taxonomy
First and Foremost objective of Green Taxonomy should be aligned with Climate Finance for
Sustainability where finance aims at reducing emissions, and enhancing sinks of greenhouse
gases and aims at reducing vulnerability of, and maintaining and increasing the resilience of,
human and ecological systems to negative climate change impacts. Green Taxonomy will focus
not only on purely green sectors, but also encourages the greening of polluting sectors.
Particularly, the focus is on activities that contribute substantially to environmental objectives.
The taxonomy will also include economic activities with a negative impact on the environment,
where these activities have substantially reduced their negative impact.

3.3 Features of Green Taxonomy

--- Page 30 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 21/54




3.3.1 Green Banking
Green Banking activities addresses five key work-streams - (i) Green Finance
(ii)
In-
house green activities covering Carbon Footprint Measurements (iii) ESG (iv) Green
Marketing/Awareness/Capacity Building (v) Reporting and disclosure on green issues. The
term "green banking" generally refers to banking practices that foster environmentally
responsible financing practices and environmentally sustainable internal processes
minimizing GHG emissions. Green banking thus involves a two-pronged approach. Firstly,
green banking focuses on the green transformation of internal operations of all banks and
FIs. It means all the banks and FIs should adopt appropriate ways of utilizing different green
product/projects/initiatives, automation and other measures to minimize carbon footprint
from activities by banks and FIs. Secondly, all banks and FIs should adopt environmentally
responsible financing; weighing up environmental risks of projects before making financing
decisions; and in particular supporting and fostering growth of upcoming 'green' initiatives
and projects.

3.3.2 Methodology of Defining Green Finance
Green Finance is a part of ethical financing and subsequently of Sustainable Finance. It is a
means of promoting environment and resource conservation by reducing consumption of
resources (e.g., electricity, water, moving away from paper-based transactions, etc.) through
its operations. Banks/FIs aiming to green themselves adopt cleaner energy sources such as
solar power. Green Finance encourages „environment-friendly initiatives everywhere by
incorporating the spirit of green banking in its financing decisions as well, leading to greening
in other sectors. Green Finance should promote the usage of greener technology in other
sectors through its lending products. It refers to banks’/FIs’ lending to projects which reduces
negative externality or promotes positive externality within the scope of the environment,
thus endorsing or supporting green initiatives through financial instruments of banks/FIs.
Green finance is defined as one of the terms used to label activities related to the two- way
interaction between the environment and finance and investment. Related terms include:
environmental, social and governance (ESG), sustainable finance and climate finance. Green
finance is used to increase level of financial flows (from banking, micro-credit, insurance and
investment) from the public, private and not-for-profit sectors to sustainable development
priorities.
Green Finance promotes and supports the flow of financial instruments and related services
towards the development and implementation of sustainable business models, investments,
trade, economic, environmental and social projects and policies. In fact, it is a part of
Sustainable
Finance.
Green
Finance
refers
to
targeted financing
to
Green
Technologies/activities/products/ projects/initiatives, Green Companies or Institutions with
better environmental performance and/or compliance with ESG norms and standards.
Moreover,
financing/funding
for
Research/Innovation/Marketing/Capacity
Building/
Awareness and digging out/hunting/ recognizing new green or environment friendly products/

--- Page 31 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 22/54



projects/initiatives will be treated as Green Finance. An exhaustive Green Finance Policy has
been thought for boosting Green Finance as part of Sustainable Finance to ensure and
establish Sustainability. Moreover, BB intends to broaden space and scope of Green Finance
through identifying nationwide green products/projects/initiatives in consultation with
concerned/competent national authorities like SREDA, DoE under MoEFCC.

3.3.3 Identification
Process
of
Green
Products/Projects/Initiatives
with
Norms/Benchmark/ Standards
 Consultation and Review of National Rules, Regulations, Guidelines, Perspective
Plans, 8th Five Year Plan, Policies, Guidance Notes, applicable SDGs and
International Standards.
 Climate Fiscal Framework (CFF) – a govt. proclamation published in 2014 and
2020 aiming at establishing greater national ownership of climate finance; Promoting
Government – NGO-Private Sector Partnership Harmonization; Enhancing result
management; Increasing mutual accountability; Broadening the opportunity for
resilient development and green growth in Bangladesh.
 Environmental Conservation Rules (ECR) 1997 & 2023 for water and air quality
standards, Standard Guidelines for Sludge and Waste management, Environment
Friendly Brick kilns
Guidance
for
Compressed
Block
Bricks, Foam
Concrete/Non Fire Bricks/Auto Cleaved Concrete (ACC), Environment friendly
brick kiln efficiency improvement systems - Hybrid Hoffmann Kiln (HHK), Tunnel
Kiln (most environment friendly brick kiln efficiency improvement system in
Bangladesh). This needs to be mentioned that Hybrid Hoffmann Kiln (HHK) and
Tunnel Kiln have been declared as “Industry” by the Ministry of Industry (MoI),
Govt. of Bangladesh. Bangladesh Environment Conservation (Amendment) Act,
2010; The ECA-2010 has stipulated the principle of sustainable development,
intergenerational equity, polluter pays principle and precautionary principles those
are in the core of the environmental jurisprudence worldwide.
 Sustainable and Renewable Energy Development Authority (SREDA)’s
policy/Guidelines
for
identifying
Renewable
and
Resource
Efficiency
Products/Projects/Initiatives.
 Consultation, Experience Shared, Lessons Learned with Practitioners, Product
Specific and Industry Specific Association Experts such as Textiles and Garments
sectors etc. and Technical Service Providers with a Business Case PP/Concept Notes
and there- after necessary review for an agreeable decision approved by the
competent respective authority.

--- Page 32 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 23/54



 Refinance Scheme for Environment Friendly Products/Projects/Initiatives (BDT
04 billion)3 has been established for availing fund at low cost for Participating
Financial Institutions (PFIs) (Banks/FIs) against their financing of renewable energy
generation and other environmentally benign projects. The size of the fund has been
increased from BDT 02 billion to BDT 04 billion due to the growing demand for
financing of environment friendly products/Projects/initiatives. The scheme includes
70 green products/projects/ initiatives under 12 categories.
 Green Transformation Fund (GTF)4 Bangladesh Bank established USD 200
million and Euro 200 million Refinance Scheme under Green Transformation Fund
for all export-oriented industries for importing Green Machineries belong to a) Water
use efficiency in wet processing; b) Water conservation and management; c) Waste
management; d) Resource efficiency and recycling; e) Renewable energy; f) Energy
efficiency; g) Heat and temperature management; h) Air ventilation and circulation
efficiency; and i) Work environment improvement initiatives. To accelerate
sustainable growth in export and manufacturing oriented sectors conducive to
transformation of green economy in the country, BDT 50 billion Refinance Scheme
under Green Transformation Fund5 has been introduced in 2022.
 Technology Development/Up-gradation Fund6 Bangladesh Bank introduced a
Refinancing Fund (Revolving in nature) of BDT 10 billion to offer refinance facility
for the Modernization and Technological Development/Up-gradation of Export
Oriented Industries in Bangladesh. To expedite the Vision-2021, Promotion from
LDC within 2024, Attainment of SDGs within 2030 and Vision-2041 of becoming a
developed country, it is necessary to increase Per Capita Export Income and the
portion of Export Income in GDP in a notable amount. In this process, there is no
alternative of modernization and technological development/up-gradation of export
oriented industries. Considering the situation, Bangladesh Bank has introduced
TDF/TUF refinance facility through the publication of SFD Circular No-2 dated 17
January 2021.







3 SFD Circular No. 02/2023
4 FE Circular No. 02/2016, 20/2020, SFD Circular No. 04/2020
5 SFD Circular No. 07/2022
6 SFD Circular No. 02/2021

--- Page 33 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 24/54



3.3.3.1 List of Green Products/Projects/Initiatives applicable for Term Finance

A. Renewable Energy
1. Net Metering Rooftop Solar System
2. Solar Grid
3. Solar Park
4. Solar Irrigation Pumping System
5. Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Assembly/Manufacturing Plant
6. Solar Water Heater Assembling/Manufacturing Plant
7. Solar Home System
8. Solar Pump for Drinking Water
9. Solar Cooker Assembly/Manufacturing Plant
10. Solar Air Heater & Cooling System Assembly/Manufacturing Plant
11. Solar Powered Cold Storage
12. Biogas Plants7
13. Integrated Cow Rearing and Setting up of Bio-gas Plant
14. Wind Power Plant
15. Hydro Power Plant
16. Portable Solar Charging Station

B. Energy & Resource Efficiency
17. Installation of Energy Auditor Certified machineries including boiler in industries for
following purposes:
i. Energy Efficiency
ii. Resource Efficiency
iii. Heat and temperature management
iv. Air ventilation and circulation efficiency
v. Business process automation
vi. Operations management
vii. Waste management
viii. Water use management
ix. Human resources development and management
x. Accounting, inventory management, marketing, sales and security
management automation
18. Auto Sensor Power Switch Assembly Plant
19. Energy Efficient Cook Stove Assembly Plant
20. LED Bulb/Tube Manufacturing/Assembly Plant
21. Energy Efficient Lime Kiln
22. Improved Rice Parboiling System

7 Establishment of Biogas Plant using following raw materials:
(i) Agricultural residues
(ii) Community (City/Municipality) based wastes
(iii) Industrial wastes

--- Page 34 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 25/54



C. Alternative Energy
23. Pyrolysis Processed Oil/Bio-crude Oil/Bio Fuel Manufacturing Plant
24. Lithium Battery Manufacturing Plant

D. Liquid Waste Management
25. Biological ETP
26. Combination of Biological and Chemical ETP
27. Conversion of Chemical ETP into Combination of Biological and Chemical ETP
28. Central ETP
29. Waste Water Treatment Plant
30. Sewage Water Treatment Plant

E. Solid Waste Management
31. Methane Recovery and Power Production from City/Municipal Waste Plant
32. Compost Production from City/Municipal Waste Plant
33. Hazardous Waste Management Unit/Plant
34. Medical Waste Management Unit/Plant
35. E-Waste Management Unit/Plant
36. Sludge Management Unit/Plant

F. Circular Economy & Eco-Projects Financing
37. PET Bottle Recycling Plant
38. Plastic Waste (PVC, PP, LDPE, HDPE, PS) Recycling Plant
39. Paper Recycling Plant
40. Recyclable Bag Manufacturing Plant
41. Recyclable Poly Propylene Thread and Bag Manufacturing Plant
42. Battery (Solar/Led Acid/Lithium Ion) Recycling Plant
43. Recycling & Recyclable Goods Manufacturing Plant
44. Biodegradable/ Reusable/ Compostable Items Manufacturing Plant
45. Solar powered/used Items Manufacturing Plant
46. Eco-industrial parks
47. Jute Products Manufacturing Plant

G. Environment Friendly Brick Production
48. Compressed Block-Brick
49. Foam Concrete Brick
50. Environment Friendly/Brick Kiln Efficiency Improvement Project (Tunnel Kiln,
HHK and other eco-friendly bricks)

H. Green/Environment Friendly Establishments
51. Establishment of Green Industry certified by appropriate authority (In Bangladesh -
SREDA, Internationally - USGBC-LEED, BREEAM, CASBEE, EDGE, GRIHA)

--- Page 35 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 26/54



52. Establishment of Green Building certified by appropriate authority (In Bangladesh -
SREDA, Internationally - USGBC-LEED, BREEAM, CASBEE, EDGE, GRIHA)
53. Establishment Green Featured Buildings (Characteristics have been given in Annex-1)
54. Concerning Factory working environment and safety (Fire defense system, disaster
defense and prevention system, workers’ health safety system)
55. Affordable Green Housing8

I. Green Agriculture
56. Earthworm compost manure production
57. Palm oil production
58. Organic manure production from slurry
59. Forestation (Social/integrated/Agro)
60. Organic Farming
61. Rooftop Agriculture/Vertical Farming or Gardening
62. Fish cultivation in cage
63. Bio-flock fish cultivation
64. Integrated Recycling System (IRS) fish cultivation/Bottom clean fish cultivation
65. Financing in coastal aquaculture
66. Floating system cultivation, Hydroponic cultivation/farming

J. Green CMSME
67. Financing in Cottage Industry

K. Green SRF
68. Community Investment for addressing Climate Resilience and Disaster Management
in a concessional rate (finance to clean air, clean water, minimizing industrial and
municipal waste, recovery and protection of water bodies, marshy lands, expansion of
green coastal belt, water purification, sustainable sanitation, water blockage
mitigation, soil and water salinity mitigation, river erosion prevention)
69. Financing in Green/Clean transportation projects (cycles, hybrid car, green vehicles
those run on wind, solar energy, electricity, hydrogen, bio-fuels etc.)
70. Financing in Sand-witch Panel (Floating or Movable Houses in coastal areas or
climate vulnerable zone)
71. Financing in Govt. approved Eco-tourism project
72. Health and Healthcare Services
73. Digital Loan/credit using MFS or other digital medium
74. Financing in educational institutions, scholarship programs, or edtech startups that
aim to improve access to quality education and workforce development.
75. Financing projects and businesses that promote gender equality, such as those
supporting women entrepreneurs, addressing gender-based violence, and promoting
women's rights.
76. Financing projects that promote cultural preservation, arts, and heritage conservation.
77. Natural ecosystem protection and restoration.

8 SFD Circular No. 02/2023

--- Page 36 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 27/54



L. Blue Economy Financing
78. Marine sustainable Fisheries
79. Mariculture
80. Coastal Ecotourism
81. Marine Plastic Pollution
82. Coastal Renewable Energy
83. Maritime Transport
84. Green Shipyard (Ship building and ship breaking) certified by appropriate authority
(compliant with the International Maritime Organization (IMO) Guidelines for Safe
and Environmentally Sound Ship Recycling under the Hong Kong Convention)
85. Eco Port
86. Marine protection

M. Information and Communication Technology
87. Hi-Tech Park
88. Broadband Networks and IT solutions
89. Internet of Things (IOT)
90. Artificial Intelligence
91. Robotics

N. Miscellaneous
92. Research and development for Sustainable Activities
93. Sustainable Supply Chain management
94. Manufacture and assembly of green building products

3.3.4 Policy Activities towards Green Environment
 Bangladesh Bank issued Green Banking Policy Guideline for Banks in 20119.
 In 2013, Policy Guidelines for Green Banking10 was also issued for the Financial
Institutions (FIs)11 and for the banks scheduled in 2013. Through these guidelines all
banks and FIs were brought under the structured reporting system.
 Besides, to expedite the ongoing initiatives of banks and FIs at faster pace, from
January 2016 onwards minimum target of direct green finance was set at 5% of the
total funded loan disbursement/investment for all banks and FIs12. In 202113, minimum
Green Finance target is set at 5% of total term loan disbursement and Sustainable
Finance target is 20% of total loan disbursement.


9 BRPD Circular 02/2011
10 GBCSRD Circular No. 04/2013 and GBCSRD Circular Letter No. 05/2013
11 Financial Institutions licensed under Financial Institutions Act, 1993.
12 GBCSRD Circular No. 04/2014
13 SFD Circular No. 01/ 2021

--- Page 37 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 28/54



 Bangladesh Bank instructed all banks and FIs to establish Sustainable Finance Unit
and Sustainable Finance Committee by abolishing both Green Banking and CSR
units14.
 Bangladesh Bank started its policy intervention on environment friendly banking
practices by issuing Environmental Risk Management (ERM) Guidelines for Banks
and FIs15 in 2011. Guidelines on Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM)
for Banks and FIs16 in Bangladesh along with an Excel-based Risk Rating Model have
been issued in 2017 which became enforceable from January 01, 2018 replacing the
Guidelines on ERM to all extent. BB issued sector specific ESRM Guidelines in
202217.
 A comprehensive list of product/initiatives of Green Finance for banks and FIs18 has
been circulated in September 2017.
 To ensure the movement towards sustainability, Banks and FIs were instructed to
form a ‘Climate Risk Fund’19 having allocation at least 10% of their Corporate Social
Responsibility budget for Climate Risk Fund. This funding can be done in both ways-
by providing grants or financing at reduced rate of interest.
 Banks & FIs have been instructed to set up Solid Waste Management System,
Rainwater Harvesting and Solar Power Panel in their newly constructed or arranged
building infrastructure20.
 By the direction of Honorable Prime Minister, and Bangladesh Bank's instruction in
conformity with that, all the banks & FIs must ensure the establishment and activeness
of Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) during financing to all possible clients21.
 To promote Sustainable Finance, Bangladesh Bank discloses Sustainability Rating of
Banks and FIs22 every year since 2020.
 Bangladesh Bank issued Green Bond Policy for Banks and FIs23 in 2022.







14 SFD Circular No. 02/ 2016
15 BRPD Circular No.01/2011
16 SFD Circular No. 02/2017
17 SFD Circular No. 03/2022
18 SFD Circular No. 04/2017
19 GBCSRD Circular No. 04/2015
20 SFD Circular No. 01/2016
21 SFD Circular No. 03/2016
22 SFD Circular No. 06/2020
23 SFD Circular No. 05/2022

--- Page 38 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 29/54



3.3.5 Economic activities for reducing negative impact on environment
Increased consumption of non-renewable resources, higher levels of pollution, global
warming and the potential loss of environmental habitats are included in the environmental
impact of economic growth. Also, economic growth caused by improved technology can
enable higher output with less pollution.
Environment provides land, water, air, energy resources, coal, oil, forests, minerals and
metals and so many other natural resources which are essential for the economic
development of the economy. It provides services which are directly used by the consumers
i.e. air we breathe and water we drink as a liquid of life.
Negative impact on the environment can be reduced through:
1) Use energy more efficiently
2) Install renewable
3) Conserve water
4) Reduce, reuse, recycle
5) Travel less
6) Consider near sourcing
7) Ship goods more efficiently

3.3.6 Screening & Monitoring
Pre disbursement Screening for Potential investments of Banks and FIs are essential in both
quantitative and qualitative judgments as well as stricter onsite and offsite monitoring
immediate after disbursement must go on to maintain the quality of the assets remain
unclassified.
 ESRM Guidelines 2022 issued by Bangladesh Bank (prepared in consultation and in
conformity with international standards) and Off-site Reporting Format in place. On-
site check list for Sustainable Financing including Green Finance will also be in
place. Product/Project/Priority Sector Specific ESDD screening as it deems fit.
 Green Transformation Fund (GTF) of BDT 50 Billion, USD 200 million and Euro
200 million Refinance Scheme has been established for all export-oriented industries
for importing Green Machineries belong to (i) Water use efficiency in wet processing
(ii) Water conservation and management (iii) Waste management (iv) Resource
efficiency and recycling (v) Renewable energy and Energy efficiency (vi) Heat
and temperature management and (vii) Air ventilation and circulation efficiency
category. Machineries imported for export- oriented industries under GTF need to go
through eligible certified energy and resource efficiency audits.
 Green Buildings and Green Industries require authenticated Certification for such as
Gold, Silver, Platinum gradation.
 Methodology for Sustainability Rating of the banks and FIs has been issued in 2020
considering sustainable finance, green finance, green refinance and CSR activities,
Core Banking Sustainability, green governance and compliance issues addressing
sustainability.

--- Page 39 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 30/54



3.3.7 Developing a Green Bond Standard
Green Bonds are bonds where proceeds from fixed-income and liquid financial instruments
are applied and specifically earmarked to raise money, in part or in full, new and/or existing
eligible climate-mitigation and adaption projects and other environmentally beneficial
activities. These bonds are typically asset-linked and backed by the issuing entity's balance
sheet.
For both the issuer and the investor - a bond is a very beneficial instrument. By issuing a
bond - the issuer gets the required fund whereas the investors will receive interest and the
principal amount. Bond Issuers may be the firms, governments, banks/FIs, supernatural
entities, and city corporations, local municipalities/entities, SPVs, etc. The issuer of green
bonds borrows the money from bond investors to mitigate climate change and adapt the same
to build climate resilience projects and other environmentally beneficial activities. Green
Bonds issued by bank/FI will be treated as “Green equity”.

Standard of Climate Bonds through a Climate Bond Taxonomy contains Energy (solar,
Hydropower, Bio-energy, Wave & Tidal, Energy Distribution and Management, Dedicated
Transmission); Transport (Rail, Vehicles, Mass Transit, Bus Rapid Transport, Water Bourne
Transport, Alternative Fuel Infrastructure); Low Carbon Buildings (Residential,
Commercial, Retrofit, Products for building Carbon efficiency) IT& Communication
(Power management, Broadband, Resource Efficiency, Tele/Video conferencing); Waste &
Pollution Control (Recycling, Other Recovery, Disposal, Prevention); Nature Based
Assets(Agricultural Land, Forests (Managed or Unmanaged), Wet Lands, Degraded Lands,
Other Land uses (managed and unmanaged), Fisheries and Aquaculture, Coastal
Infrastructure, Land Remediation); Industry & Energy Intensive Commercial
(Manufacturing, Energy efficiency processes, Energy Efficiency Products, Retail and
wholesale, Data centers, Process and fugitive emission, Energy Efficient Appliances,
Combined Heat and Power). Green Bonds should also implement a Gender focused element,
so that they are aligned with Sustainable Development Goal 5 (gender equality).
Green Bond financing is a huge growth area especially post 2020. Accredited verifiers under
the Climate Bonds Initiative (CBI) can certify a Green Bond which is issued under the CBI
standard. The Climate Bonds Taxonomy identifies the assets and projects needed to deliver a
low carbon economy and gives GHG emissions screening criteria consistent with the 2-
degree global warming target set by the COP 21 Paris Agreement. It has been developed
based on the latest climate science including research from the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) and the International Energy Agency (IEA), and has benefited from
the input of hundreds of technical experts from around the world. It can be used by any entity
looking to identify which assets and activities, and associated financial instruments, are
compatible with a 2-degree trajectory.
The policy on Green Bond Financing was circulated on 20 September 202224. The objective of
the Policy on Green Bond Financing for Banks and FIs is to facilitate sustainable investment

24 SFD Circular No. 05/2022

--- Page 40 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 31/54



by banks and financial institutions with a focus on climate change mitigation and adaptation,
energy and resource efficiency, and a green economy. Taxonomy for financing in green bond
also occupies an important part of the policy. Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), Fifth
Year Plans, National Sustainable Development Strategy, Perspective Plan 2021-2041, Delta
Plan 2100, etc. are followed in this policy.
Eight sectors have been given a standard identification process:
1. Low-carbon electricity, heating, and cooling;
2. Green establishments and built environments;
3. Energy and resource efficiency industry;
4. Low-carbon transportation;
5. Circular economy;
6. Waste water and water management;
7. Agriculture and land use;
8. Activities to enhance climate resilience not elsewhere classified; and Services to support
the low-carbon, climate-resilient, and green economy.
In 88 activities, each of these elements has been structurally put in the Green Bond Taxonomy.
Gender focused green bonds
Green bonds should have a gender component, both in the aims of the associated projects, and
in the overall understanding of what makes a green bond gender focused.
3.3.8 Green Investment
Green Investments are focused on products/projects/initiatives committed to the conservation
of natural resources, the production and discovery of alternative energy sources, the
implementation of clean air and water projects, or other environment-friendly business
practices. Green investments belong to following categories:
A. Investment in Green Bond/Green SUKUK
Bangladesh is highly vulnerable to climate change risk. In this context, GoB has
developed a master plan to combat the impending threats. Accordingly, it is necessary to
build-up eco-friendly industries/concerns, infrastructures and plants for green energy
production. All those projects require long-term mega investments. As issuance concerns,
green bond/green SUKUK issuers commit to provide investors with detailed information
on the projects and infrastructure supported with the proceeds. These are typically asset-
linked and backed by the issuing entity's balance sheet, so they usually carry the
same credit rating as their issuers' other debt obligations.
B. Investment in Impact Fund
Bangladesh Bank issued a guideline in 2015 for the scheduled banks and another in 2016
for the financial institutions for investing in Special Purpose Vehicle, funds not listed in
the capital market, Alternative Investment Fund or any such funds registered by the

--- Page 41 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 32/54



Bangladesh Securities and Exchange Commission (BSEC).25 Investment by scheduled
banks and financial institutions in any impact fund which is registered under the BSEC
(Alternative Investment) Rules, 2015 and formed for the following sectors/purposes
will be considered as Green Investment26.
1. Resource Efficiency
2. Air Emission and Quality Efficiency
3. Resource Recycling
4. Waste Management (both solid and liquid)
5. Renewable Energy
6. Land Contamination Prevention/Mitigation
7. Energy Efficiency
8. Land Acquisition and Resettlement Management
9. Water Management and Conservation
10. Labour and Working Condition Management
11. Water Use Efficiency
12. Community Health and Safety Management
13. Waste Water and Effluent Treatment Management
14. Indigenous People and Cultural Heritage
15. Heat and Temperature Management
16. Women and Child Right Protection
17. Air Ventilation and Circulation Efficiency
18. Environment/Climate Friendly Industry/Building/Brick Kiln
19. Environment/Climate Friendly Transportation/Vehicle
20. Nature Conservation
21. Environment Friendly Agriculture
22. Any other deemed Eligible by BB
3.3.9 Greening the Polluting Industries
As per ECR 1997 and 2023 issued by DoE under MoEFCC, all industrial units are categorized
into Green, Yellow, Orange and Red category with respect to pollution level. Among these
industrial units, Orange is considerably more polluted and Red category units belong to the
most polluting industries. Sector Specific ESDD Screening for some more or most polluting
priority industries like Textile, Steel, Cement, Brick Kiln, Tannery, Power Plant etc. will be
required to go under dedicated ESDD screening checks for greening those industrial units
through fulfillment of required work conditions & compliances of DoE and accordingly
installations/introductions of Green Products/Machineries/Projects for reducing emission to a
required extent and thus green transformation will happen to these polluting industrial units.



25 DOS circular No.-02/ 2015, DFIM circular No.-04/ 2016
26 SFD Circular No.:01/2019

--- Page 42 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 33/54



3.3.10 Climate finance
UNFCCC defined climate finance as the part of Sustainable Finance that: “aims at reducing
emissions and enhancing sinks of greenhouse gases and aims at reducing vulnerability of, and
maintaining and increasing the resilience of, human and ecological systems to negative climate
change impacts”. Climate finance refers to local, national or transnational financing drawn
from public, private and alternative sources of financing that seeks to support mitigation
(reduce of GHG emission) and adaptation actions that will address climate change. The public
sector and civil society play a crucial role in climate finance, yet the private sector and impact
investors in particular, play a crucial role as well. The UN Framework Convention, the Kyoto
Protocol and the Paris Agreement call for financial assistance from Parties with more financial
resources to those that are less endowed and more vulnerable. This recognizes that the
contribution of countries to climate change and their capacity to prevent it and cope with its
consequences vary enormously. Climate finance is needed for mitigation because large-scale
investments are required to significantly reduce GHG emissions. Climate finance is equally
important for adaptation, as significant financial resources are needed to adapt to the adverse
effects and reduce the impacts of changing climate.
In accordance with the principle “common but differentiated responsibility and respective
capabilities” set out in the UNFCCC, developed country Parties are to provide financial
resources to assist developing country Parties in implementing the objectives of the UNFCCC.
The Paris Agreement reaffirms the obligations of developed countries, while encouraging
voluntary contributions by other Parties. Developed country Parties should also continue to
take the lead in mobilizing climate finance from a wide variety of sources, instruments, and
channels, noting the significant role of public funds, through a variety of actions, including
supporting country-driven strategies, and taking into account the needs and priorities of
developing country Parties. Such mobilization of climate finance should represent a
progression beyond previous efforts.
It is important for all governments and stakeholders to understand and assess the financial
needs of developing countries, as well as to understand how these financial resources can be
mobilized. Provision of resources should also aim to achieve a balance between adaptation and
mitigation.
Overall, efforts under the Paris Agreement are guided by its aim of making finance flows
consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient
development. Assessing progress in provision and mobilization of support is also part of the
global stock take under the Agreement. The Paris Agreement also places emphasis on the
transparency and enhanced predictability of financial support. Impact investors seek to
generate positive, measurable social and environmental impact alongside a financial return.
Mobilizing capital from institutional investors will be a key lever in driving the change needed
to fill this funding gap and address the climate crisis.

--- Page 43 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 34/54




Climate Finance Markets and the Real Economy, proposed a starting point for defining the
topic of Climate Finance and Climate-Aligned Finance: Climate Finance is defined as
financing that supports the transition to a climate-resilient economy by enabling mitigation
actions, especially the reduction of GHG emissions, and adaptation initiatives promoting the
climate resilience of infrastructure and general social and economic assets.











3.3.10.1 Climate finance framework
Climate Finance Framework means classification of climate finance and its dimension. It is a
structured mechanism for identifying and recognizing a product/a project/an initiative belongs
to climate finance. Climate finance framework includes:
Climate change mitigation
(ii) Climate change adaptation
(iii) Climate change induced loss & damage

3.3.10.2 Objectives/focus/purpose of climate finance framework
Climate finance framework has been structured by considering all the dimension of climate
change. Forming Climate Finance Framework is very much essential and within the broader
scope of sustainable development agenda of a country like Bangladesh. The policy actions and
operations have been included in the framework to provide a comprehensive understanding for
concerned stakeholders regarding climate finance.

Component of Climate Finance













B. Zero-carbon or near-zero
carbon activities
C. “Transition
activities”
that
contribute
to
transition
to
net-zero
emissions economy but
not currently close to net-
zero carbon: Associated
financing
typically
referred to by market as
“Transition Finance”
Climate Change Mitigation

A. Adaptation
initiatives
promoting the Climate
resilience
of
infrastructure as well
as
of
social
and
economic assets more
broadly.



Climate Change
Adaptation
D. Loss and damage address
the economic and non-
economic
loss
and
damage by the impacts of
climate change.





Climate Change Loss and
Damage

--- Page 44 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 35/54







Climate Finance Framework
Methodology of Defining Climate Finance
Identification of Climate Change Adaptation
finance
Identification of Climate Change Mitigation
finance
Identification of Climate Change Loss & Damage
finance
Inclusion of Technological advancement to
address climate change Adaptation, Mitigation,
and L & D
Screening & Monitoring
Climate Banking
Policy Activities towards Climate Change
(Adaptation, mitigation, and L & D)
Strategic Planning to address climate change
issues
Climate Marketing Awareness & Capacity
Building
Climate Impact Assessment/ Review and R &D
for Climate Product Innovation
Identification process of climate
products/projects/initiatives with norms/
benchmark/standards
Exploring market mechanism for climate finance
Developing a climate bond standard
Climate investment
Disclosure of Climate Finance
Rating

--- Page 45 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 36/54



3.3.10.3 Identification of climate change adaptation finance
Adaptation refers to adjustments in ecological, social, or economic systems in response to
actual or expected climatic stimuli and their effects or impacts. It refers to changes in
processes, practices, and structures to moderate potential damages or to benefit from
opportunities associated with climate change. In simple terms, countries and communities
need to develop adaptation solution and implement action to respond to the impacts of
climate change that are already happening, as well as prepare for future impacts.

--- Page 46 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 37/54



3.3.10.4 Identification of climate change mitigation finance
Climate change mitigation consists of actions to limit global warming and its related effects.
This involves reductions in human emissions of greenhouse gases as well as activities that
reduce their concentration in the atmosphere. It is one of the ways to respond to climate
change, along with adaptation.

As there is a direct relation between global average temperatures and the concentration of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, the key for the solution to the climate change problem
rests in decreasing the amount of emissions released into the atmosphere and in reducing the
current concentration of CO2e by enhancing sinks (e.g. increasing the area of forests).
Efforts to reduce emissions and enhance sinks are referred to as “mitigation”.

--- Page 47 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 38/54




3.3.10.5 Identification of climate change Loss & Damage (L&D) finance
Loss and damage is a term that is used to describe total losses, such as death and land lost
due to climate induced sea-level rise, and repairable damage, such as destroyed
infrastructure. While loss and damage typically refers to the economic consequences of
climate change, the term can also apply to cultural and traditional practices that are lost
due to climate impacts.




3.3.10.6 Carbon Footprint Measurement & Carbon Finance
Carbon Footprint Measurement- A carbon footprint is the total amount of greenhouse gas
emissions that originates from the production, use and end-of-life of a product or service. It
includes carbon dioxide, the gas most commonly emitted by humans and others, including
methane, nitrous oxide, and fluorinated gases, which trap heat in the atmosphere, causing
global warming. Bangladesh Bank has already published its HQ’s first annual carbon
footprint report, 201427 on carbon footprint measurement as a part of their sustainability
commitment to produce and publish own carbon footprint.


27 https://www.bb.org.bd//pub/annual/carbon/report_2014.pdf

--- Page 48 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 39/54



As a result, BB has been encouraging other organizations of Bangladesh, especially Banks &
FIs to measure and publish their own (internal) carbon footprint. Now BB intends to collect &
assess the energy consumption related data of Banks & FIs on a yearly basis for taking
necessary steps to reduce the internal carbon emission of Banks & FIs; this will be done in a
gradual manner where the Banks and FIs will be required to calculate and report the carbon
footprint of their Headquarter and later other branches

In addition to this, the Banks and FIs will gradually be encouraged to measure and report the
carbon emission of their loan portfolio (existing or new loans, other financial products etc.).
It is advisable and will be implemented gradually, that all the projects will be assessed
on their ‘green-merit’ for financing and re-financing and assessed by a 3rd party
(recommended or enlisted by Bangladesh Bank) subject matter expert prior to selection of
green projects.
The Banks and FIs should develop a comprehensive GHG Inventory of their own operation
across all locations and later develop GHG abatement and offset strategy to reduce carbon
emission. A framework for this will be developed and published soon.
Carbon Finance- There are many ways and efforts underway to reduce carbon emissions
and promote activities which help to convert into a tradable financial instrument and made
carbon reduction a valuable economic commodity. To find a common unit for this
commodity all GHGs are converted to CO2 equivalents (CO2e). The CO2es or Certified
Carbon Emission Reductions (CERs) or Voluntary Carbon Emission Reductions (VERs)
Certificates are traded on carbon markets. Carbon Finance is earned by making investments
in generation of greenhouse gas emission reductions that can be traded in carbon markets.
Common Carbon Finance project types include cleaner production projects and projects that
increase energy efficiency or generate power from renewable resources.
Banks & FIs could participate actively in carbon markets in various ways:
 Offering advisory services to clients entering or active in carbon markets, including
marketing, structuring, transacting, and sales of carbon;
 Offering targeted financing to companies with GHG emission reductions projects
and programs that generate a stream of carbon finance income;
 Selling emission reductions in the carbon market which they aggregate and
purchase from portfolios of clients with smaller-scale GHG emission reductions
projects;
 Making equity investments in companies that originate and transact GHG emission
reduction projects and programs that earn carbon finance payments, and
 Receiving emission reductions in addition to interest payments as part of upside-
sharing agreed with clients that generate carbon credits.
BB intends to introduce Carbon Finance as on demand in the financial market of Bangladesh.
There are existing internationally accredited carbon reduction projects in Bangladesh in
which the banks can participate to ensure sustainability and additional revenue for the
project.

--- Page 49 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 40/54



3.3.11 Technological Advancement for Inclusiveness in Green Activities and Green Growth
“Technological Advancement for Inclusiveness in Green Activities and Green Growth” is
well covered in “Inclusion of Technological advancement” of Sustainable Finance
Taxonomy and the theme is not required to mention separately again.

3.3.12 Green Strategic Planning, R&D for Green Innovation, Product Marketing,
Awareness and Capacity Building, Green Impact Assessment /Review
Green Taxonomy has been included as part of Sustainable Finance Taxonomy. As such Green
Strategic Planning, R&D for Green Innovation, Product Marketing, Awareness and Capacity
Building, Green Impact Assessment /Review have been taken in due consideration while
discussing earlier in Sustainable Finance Taxonomy.

3.3.13 Green Finance Disclosure
Green Taxonomy has been included as part of Sustainable Finance Taxonomy. Banks and
Financial Institutions should disclose the initiatives/practices time to time taken by them in
their respective websites. The following disclosure should be made and updated by all Banks
and FIs:
Updated and detailed information regarding Banks’/FIs’ environmental activities
and performances of major clients should be disclosed.
ii.
Banks/FIs shall keep their annual report and websites updated with the
disclosures on Green Banking initiatives/activities.
iii.
Banks/FIs should incorporate a section/dropdown/tab for their existing
Green products/projects/initiatives in their website.
iv.
A customer complaint/feedback option should be in their website for any query
made in this regard.
Brief information regarding BB Support Funds should be disclosed on website
in a displayable tab.

--- Page 50 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 41/54




Chapter-4: Target, Rating & Rewards
4.1 Fixation of Green Finance Target and Sustainable Finance Target including Green
Finance
All Banks and Financial Institutions shall determine their annual target on the basis of their
immediate previous year’s net outstanding amount and declare their yearly budget allocation
both for Green Finance and Sustainable Finance at the beginning of the calendar year. Banks
and FIs will determine their Green Finance and Sustainable Finance target on the basis of
immediate previous year’s Net Outstanding of loans and advances (Total Outstanding less staff
loans, Credit Card Loans and total classified loans). In conformity with BB’s guidelines, Banks
and Financial Institutions shall set target of Green Finance and Sustainable Finance considering
all potential area and product/projects with required justification.
4.2 Attainment of Green Finance and Sustainable Finance Target
Banks and FIs will report on their attainment of Green Finance and Sustainable Finance on
Quarterly basis. Sustainable Finance Department will determine Green Finance attainment of all
Banks and FIs on the basis of Term Loan Disbursement (excluding staff loan), and attainment of
Sustainable Finance on the basis of Total Loan Disbursement (excluding staff loan). Attainment
of Green Finance and Sustainable Finance should be maintained in conformity with relevant
instructions issued by BB.
4.3 Sustainability Rating
Banks and FIs will be rated under sustainability rating considering their performance on
environmental, social and governance attributes especially their policies and performance. This
Rating will include their performance in five major components: (i) Sustainable Finance (ii)
CSR (iii) Green Refinance (iv) Core Banking Sustainability and (v) Banking Services Coverage.
Banks and FIs will be rated once a year.
4.4 Compliance and Non-compliance
Banks/FIs while financing and reporting will meticulously comply with the guidelines mentioned
in this policy as well as credit norms and instructions of concerned regulators/competent
authorities. Necessary actions will be taken against respective banks/FIs for any non-compliance
of the said guidelines/credit norms/instructions and returns as per Bank Company Act 1991 and
Financial Institutions Act 1993.
4.5 Reward and Incentives
Sustainable Finance of banks/FIs will enhance their credibility in reducing systemic risk,
strengthening risk management, ensuring prudential decision making and comfortably coping
with the transition towards sustainable development. Bangladesh Bank will recognize top
performing banks and FIs on basis of Sustainability Rating. Besides, Bangladesh Bank will
consider other incentives for top performing banks and FIs in due course of time.

--- Page 51 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 42/54




Chapter-5: Exclusion List & Inclusion Criteria of
Products/Projects/Initiatives for Sustainable Finance
5.1 Exclusion List=> Ineligible for Finance
All loan proposals will have to be first screened against this exclusion list. Financing in any
activity/area in the following list is not to be considered for financing.

Sector
Activities/ Areas
1. Agriculture
2. MSMEs and
Large Industry
(Manufacturing
and Service)
3. Trade
and
Commerce
Production or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under laws
or regulations of Government of Bangladesh or international conventions
and
agreements,
or
subject
to
international
bans,
such
as
pharmaceuticals, pesticides/herbicides, ozone depleting substances,
PCB's, wildlife or products regulated under the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES). A list of applicable
national regulations and international treaties for this policy has been
given in Annex-2.
 Ship breaking/trading activities refers to:
 Ships with prevalent asbestos use (for e.g. passenger cruise);
 Ships listed on the Greenpeace blacklist*;
 Ships not certified “gas free” for hot work
Drift net fishing, deep sea bottom trawling, or fishing with the use of
explosives or cyanide
Hydraulic horn and >75 decibel horns, polypropylene and polythene
bags, two stroke engines.
Operations impacting UNESCO World Heritage Site and/or Ramsar site
Illegal logging, and logging operations or conversion of land for
plantation use in primary tropical moist forests
Production or activities involving forced labor/ child labor
 Production or trade in:
 Weapons and munitions
 Tobacco
 Gambling, casinos
 Pornography (goods/stores/web/app-based)
 Brick production through Fixed Chimney Kiln (FCK)
 Production or activities that impinge on the lands owned, or claimed
under adjudication, by Indigenous Peoples, without full documented
consent of such peoples
*http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/oceans/pirate-fishing/Blacklist1/

--- Page 52 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 43/54




5.2 Exclusion List=> Ineligible for Sustainable Finance
Any finance falls in the following list will not be eligible as sustainable finance.

Sector
Activities/ Areas
1. Agriculture
2. MSMEs
and
Large Industry
(Manufacturing
and Service)
3. Trade
and
Commerce
If does significant harm to natural reserves, scenic spots, drinking
water source reserves, basic farm land reserves, forest parks, geo
parks, important wet lands, natural forests, important habitats for
wildlife, key protected places for growth and reproduction of wild
plants, natural spawning grounds, feeding grounds, wintering ground
sand migration channels for important aquatic organisms, natural
fishing grounds, water and soil.
Use of thermal coal, high toxic and high residual/chemical
pesticides/fertilizer, use of livestock and poultry food not approved by
the government.
 Upstream fossil fuel extraction and production (including gas, coal
and oil)
 New standalone fossil fuel electricity production
 projects that lead to an increase in CO2 emissions (through
capacity expansion and increased output as a result of the
project/investment)
 Processing, storing, marketing of gas, and oil
 Refining of oil
 Nuclear power generation and related assets
 Distribution or transport of fossil fuels
 Construction, maintenance or expansion of roads
 Heavy duty vehicles, infrastructure for fossil fuels (e.g., fuel
stations) or bunker fuelled shipping infrastructure
Projects supported by the activities involving heavy metal
contaminated soil.
The projects do not support the processing, recycling and other
activities of waste (solid and liquid).
The projects do not maintain standard bio-safety level, fire defense
system, workers health safety equipments.
The projects include the storage, logistics and distribution of toxic,
harmful and dangerous goods.
The projects endanger local livelihoods; decrease the quality life of
indigenous people.
The projects do not include gender equality, freedom of association
and right to bargaining of company employee/workers.
The projects threaten community/public health

--- Page 53 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 44/54



5.3 Inclusion Criteria of Products/Projects/Initiatives for Sustainable Finance
Banks and FIs will apply to Director (SFD), Sustainable Finance Department, Bangladesh Bank,
Head Office through the letter signed by the respective Managing Director/Chief Executive
Director for the approval before financing to any new products/projects/initiatives as Sustainable
Finance (Green Finance or Sustainable linked finance) beyond the products/projects/initiatives
mentioned in this policy. A report must be attached with the application evaluating Financial
Profitability, Environmental and Social Feasibility and Pre-Risk Assessment of new
products/projects/initiatives for Sustainable Finance. Upon the approval by Bangladesh Bank the
proposed products/projects/initiatives will be considered suitable for Sustainable Finance.
Aspects of products/projects/initiatives for the inclusion in the list of Bangladesh Bank for
Sustainable Finance:
5.3.1 Financial Profitability
i. Activity/ Operating Efficiency
ii. Liquidity
iii. Solvency
iv. Profitability
v. Valuation
5.3.2 Environmental and Social Feasibility
i. Resource Efficiency
ii. Resource Recycling
iii. Renewable Energy
iv. Energy Efficiency
v. Water Management and Conservation
vi. Water Use Efficiency
vii. Waste Water and Effluent Treatment Management
viii. Heat and temperature management
ix. Air ventilation and circulation efficiency
x. Air emission and quality efficiency
xi. Waste (liquid and solid) Management
xii. Land Contamination Prevention/Mitigation
xiii. Land Acquisition and Resettlement Management
xiv. Labor and Working Condition Management
xv. Community Health and Safety Management
xvi. Indigenous People and Cultural Heritage

--- Page 54 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 45/54



5.3.3 Pre-Risk Assessment
i. Cash Flow Forecasting (Net Present Value, Internal Rate Return, Discounted
Payback Period and others)
ii. Collateral Requirement
iii. SWOT Analysis
iv. Market (Domestic/Export-oriented) Analysis
v. Fiscal Aspects

--- Page 55 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 46/54




Conclusion
It is evident that "Policy Guidelines for Green Banking" issued on February 27, 2011 by
Bangladesh Bank has gradually changed the mindset of the traditional bankers. Green Banking
Policy has covered mostly all the issues on Green Banking activities, most importantly green
finance, a part of sustainable finance. It is also apparent that banks and FIs were long-awaiting to
contribute to Sustainable and Green Finance in a structured and transparent manner and
recognition there-in. Reporting on Sustainable Finance has been structured in such a manner that
contribution by a bank or a financial institution towards sustainable finance including green
finance is justified and recognized. It is not required to mention that Sustainable Finance Policy
has not only broaden the scope of Sustainable and Green financing for the participating banks
and FIs but also has enabled them to be rated better and recognized well in the sustainability
rating of BB.
The concern for environmental sustainability and inclusive growth has given mass recognition to
the concept of corporate social responsibility and inclusive finance. In an emerging economy
like Bangladesh, environmental management needs to be the key focus area of the business
fraternity especially the banking industry being the major intermediary. Addressing
environmental and social risks associated with financing activities by banks/FIs is a “must do”
step in overall Credit Rating for credit approval. Stricter monitoring thereafter disbursement
must go on. Accordingly, Bangladesh Bank has also integrated issues of socially responsible
initiatives along with core activities of banks/FIs driving towards sustainable finance strategies.
By integrating gender aspect into sustainable finance initiatives and policies, Banks and FIs can
contribute to a more holistic and inclusive approach to sustainability, recognizing that gender
equality is a fundamental component of social and environmental balance and governance
(ESG).
Sustainability is the issue never ever be compromised with anything. Where ever we go, where
ever we may be, if we are there, if we exist, if anything persists it is because of sustainability. It
is our struggle, it is our untiring effort, the best we can do for the survival on earth- the
contribution we can minimize pollution, environmental threats, resilience to climate change with
respect to climate change mitigation and climate change adaptation; resilience to inequality,
imbalance, fight against all evils, inconsistency, corruption, fight for helpless, distressed, non
privileged, the CSR community investment with a view to preserving the basic rights of human
being, addressing gender equity for women empowerment. Ensuring food security, establishing
green building and green industries; sandwich panels for the habitation of the coastal people,
impactful investment and so many footmarks, achievements and measures- all these for future
generations, for every breath they will take. The world at large is now experiencing the
devastating effects of the global climate crisis including droughts, floods, tsunami, water
scarcity, and rising sea level. These consequences of climate change threaten the sustainable
living on this planet which calls for an urgent and collective response from both developed and
developing nations, especially countries like Bangladesh. On that standpoint, we need to take
necessary steps for our sustainability in the long run.

--- Page 56 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 47/54




Annexure
1. Annexe-1: Characteristics of Green Featured Building

Sl
Equipment
Name
Specification
01
Air Conditioning
System
Air-conditioning accounts for more than 50% of the total electricity costs in a
centrally air-conditioned building. Hence the efficiency of a HVAC system is
of prime importance. The heart of the HVAC system is the chiller and hence it
is important to procure an efficient chiller system. The cooling equipment shall
meet or exceed the minimum efficiency requirement as stated in the table
below.
Table–Minimum efficiency requirements for water chilling packages
Description
Capacity
COP
IPLV
Input
kW/TR
Test
procedure
Air cooled
chillers
including
the
condenser
All
Capacities
2.8
3.05
1.25
ARI 550/590
Air cooled
chillers
without the
condenser
All
Capacities
3.1
3.45
1.13
ARI 550/590
Water
cooled,
electrical
operated
positive
displaceme
nt
(Reciprocat
ing)
All
capacities
4.20
5.05
0.83
ARI 550/590
Water
cooled
electrical
operated
positive
displaceme
nt (rotary
screw and
scroll)
<150 TR
4.45
5.2
0.79
ARI 550/590
≥150 TR
and 300 TR
4.90
5.6
0.71
≥300 TR
5.5
6.15
0.64
Water
cooled
electrically
operated
centrifugal
<150 TR
5.0
5.25
0.70
ARI 550/590
≥150 TR
and 300 TR
5.55
5.9
0.63
≥300 TR
6.1
6.4
0.57

--- Page 57 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 48/54




Sl
Equipment
Name
Specification
Air cooled
absorption
single
effect
All
Capacities
0.60
ARI 560
Water
cooled
absorption
single
effect
All
Capacities
0.70
ARI 560
Water
cooled
absorption
double
effect
(indirect
fired)
All
Capacities
1.0
1.05
ARI 560
Water
cooled
absorption
double
effect
(Direct
fired)
All
Capacities
1.0
1.0
ARI 560
Table– Minimum efficiencies requirements for air cooled
air-conditioning equipment
Equipme
nt type
Refrigerant
output
Seasonal coefficient of
performance (SCOP)
kW/kW
Testing
procedure
Air-
cooled air
condition
er
<19 kW
2.84 (COPc)
ARI 210/240
 19 kW and <
40 kW
3.16 (COPc)
ARI 340/360
 40 kW and <
70 kW
3.04 (COPc)
 70 kW
2.72 (COPc)
Evaporati
ng water-
cooled air
condition
ers
<19 kW
3.35 (COP)
ARI 210/240
 19 kW and <
40 kW
3.37 (COP)
ARI 340/360
 40 kW and <
70 kW
3.22 (COP)
3.02 (IPLV)
 70 kW
2.70 (COP)
Air-
cooled
condense
r units
 40 kW
2.96 (COP)
3.28 (IPLV)
ARI 365

--- Page 58 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 49/54




Sl
Equipment
Name
Specification
Water-
cooled or
evaporati
ng
condense
r units
 40 kW
3.84 COP
NOTES:
- AC coefficient of performance: COP = Refrigerant output / power
input (kW/ kW);
- Condenser unit, including the compressor and condenser coils;
- Minimum coefficients of performance listed in Table 2 are
calculated at 100% of the refrigerant output. To calculate the
coefficient of performance of AC units running for one year, ARI
340/360 uses the following formula:
IPLV= 0.01A+0.42B+0.45C+0.12D
Where:
IPLV – The Integrated Chapter Load Value- coefficient of
performance of the AC unit operating for one year at various Chapter
loads.
A = COP – coefficient of performance of the AC unit (W/W) at full
load;
B = COP – coefficient of performance of the AC unit (W/W) at 75%
load;
C = COP – coefficient of performance of the AC unit (W/W) at 50%
load;
D = COP – coefficient of performance of the AC unit (W/W) at 25%
load;
ARI – American Refrigerant Institute
02
Lift / Escalator
Escalator–the escalator must be fitted with controls & Sensors to reduce speed
or auto stop when no traffic is detected. Escalators shall be designed with one
of the energy-saving features as described below:
1. Reduced speed control: The escalator shall change to a slower speed
when no activity has been detected for a period of a maximum of three
(3) minutes. Detection shall be by photocell activation or similar
sensor at the top and bottom landing areas.
2. Use on demand: The escalator shall shut down when no activity has
been detected for a period of a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes. Use
on demand escalators must be designed with energy efficient soft start
technology. The escalator shall start automatically when required; the
activation shall be by photocells or sensor installed in the top and
bottom landing areas.
3. Use of AC Variable-Voltage and Variable-Frequency (VVVF) drives
B. Elevator (lift) - Elevator (lift) must be provided with controls to reduce the
energy demand. To meet this requirement, the following features must be
incorporated in traction drive elevators:
1. Use of AC Variable-Voltage and Variable-Frequency (VVVF) drives

--- Page 59 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 50/54




Sl
Equipment
Name
Specification
on non-hydraulic elevators.
2. The lift car uses energy-efficient lighting and display lighting i.e. an
average lamp efficacy, across all fittings in the car, of >55 lamp
lumens/ circuit watt and lighting switches off after the lift has been
inactive for a period of a maximum of five (5) minutes.
3. The lifts operate in a stand-by condition during off-peak periods. For
example, the power side of the lift controller and other operating
equipment such as lift car lighting, user displays, and ventilation fans
switch off when the lift has been inactive for a period of a maximum
of five (5) minutes.
03
Solar power
system
3% of Energy of use for Lift and Escalator
04
Fresh air supply
& mechanical
Vent
Mechanical ventilation and Blower in Basement Floors and Fresh air supply
system in habitable floor
*Variable speed derive fan & motor unit
05
Lighting
Limitation of Lighting Power Density (LPD) will help to design the lighting
system in the most efficient way and reduce the lighting and cooling load in
the buildings. The following table sets the average LPD limits for each
building type:
Space
LPD (W/m2)
Business
Mercantile
13
Hotels
Hospitals/Health care
11
Residential
Schools
11
Covered parking
Open and outdoor parking
1.6
Industries
As per requirement for
the specific task
preferably LED lights
06
Sensors
Occupancy Sensors , Day light sensors, Co2 Sensor
at least 10 no of sensors (single or different type)
07
Automation
Building Management System (BMS) or Energy Management System (EMS):
An EMS/BMS reduces energy use in buildings by monitoring conditions and
controlling energy-consuming equipment. Frequently used for building loads
such as lighting and space conditioning, an EMS/BMS is versatile enough to
provide energy savings in process operations in manufacturing facilities.
Control functions include everything from basic stop/start functions to more
complex, chiller optimization routines.
08
Ceiling Fans
Energy consumption ≤ 65 watt
(at least 5 fans)
Energy Efficient Ceiling fan: An energy efficient ceiling fan can save around
35% energy with compared to regular ceiling fan.
09
Rain water
Collection and
Discharge
Rain water collection and use system
2000 L/ Day capacity tank and Underground Discharge system for over flow
water.

--- Page 60 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 51/54




Sl
Equipment
Name
Specification
10
WTP
Water Treatment Plant including recycling and reuse system with energy
efficient pumping system (5KLD)minimum
11
Hot Water
system
Solar Water Heater: Solar water heating systems use solar panels, called
collectors, fitted to roof.
(200 Liter/hour) minimum
12
Motor Usage
Variable Frequency Drive:
VFDs (Variable Frequency Drives) are basically a green energy savings
product that matches the amount of work or load on a motor to the amount of
energy it needs to power that amount of work. This reduces excess energy
from being wasted.
Soft Starter:
A soft starter is a device used with motors to temporarily reduce the load and
torque during startup. It applies a gradually increasing voltage to the motors
resulting in smooth acceleration of the motor and coupled load.
13
Water Fixture
Water efficient fittings include faucets, showerheads and flushes that use less
water in order to perform the same function of cleaning as effectively as
standard models. Water efficiency is an important aspect, especially as fresh
water resources are increasingly getting depleted at a rate faster that they are
replenished.
Use of efficient plumbing fixtures, sensors, auto control valves, aerators, flow
control and pressure-reducing devices can result in significant reduction in
water consumption.
The following low flow fixtures shall be used:
14
Masonry
Materials
Concrete Hollow Blocks / Interlocking Concrete Block/ lightweight Cellular
Concrete/ Clay Brick of Auto Brick factory with efficient kiln.
(at list 60% of total Masonry wall)
The Factory should have energy audit report from
national/International Certifying agency
15
Steel
Reinforcement steel from the energy efficient factories
The Factory should have energy audit report from
national/International Certifying agency
>10% Recycle Materials content
16
Ready mix
concrete
Natural Stone chips as course aggregate
The Factory should have energy audit report from
Type of fixtures
Quantity
Unit
Water closets
Dual Flush
(6/4)
liters/flushing cycle
(full/low)
Shower
9.5
liters/min at 500 kPa
Urinals
Auto Sensor
Hand wash taps
6 Auto
Sensor/Push
system
liters/min at 400 kPa
Kitchen/pantry faucets
liters/min at 400 kPa

--- Page 61 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 52/54




Sl
Equipment
Name
Specification
national/International Certifying agency
Should have recycle content or fly ash.
17
Paint
Low Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) paint (VOC level <10g/L )
The Factory should have energy audit report from
national/International certifying agency
18
Low- E-Glass
Solar Heat Gain Coefficient (SHGC) 0.4 (maximum) or Shading Coefficient
(SC) 0.46 (maximum)
Visible Light Transmittance (VLT) of the glazed element should not be lower
than 35%.
Double Glazing Window:
Energy-efficient glazing keeps home or office cooler and quieter as well as
reducing our energy bills. That might mean double or triple-glazing, secondary
glazing, or just heavier curtains. Double-glazed windows have two sheets of
glass with a gap in between, usually about 16mm, to create an insulating
barrier.
19
UPVC window
frame
Window frame made of UPVC (all Curtain and Sliding windows of a building)
The Factory should have energy audit report from
national/International Certifying agency
20
Insulation
Roof top Insulation & heat reflective paint (Solar Radiation Index value >78)
or Insulation blokes

2. Annexe-2: List of Applicable National Regulations and International Treaties


Relevant local regulation
Relevant international treaties and conventions
for which Bangladesh is a signatory
 National Environmental Policy, 2018
 Environment Pollution Control Ordinance,
1977
 Environmental
Quality
Standards
for
Bangladesh, 1991
 National Environment Management Action
Plan (NEMAP), 1995
 Environment Conservation Act, 1995 and
amended in 2002, 2010
 Environment Conservation Rules, 1997 and
2023
 EIA Guidelines For Industry, 1997, 2021
 National Labour Policy 2012
 Labour Act, 2006 (Amended in
2013,2015,2018)
 Bangladesh Labour Rules, 2015
 Labour Welfare Foundation law 2006

 Occupational Hazards Due to Air Pollution,
Noise and Vibration (Geneva), 1977
 Prevention
and
Control
of
Occupational
Hazards (Geneva), 1974
 Occupational Safety and Health in Working
Environment (Geneva), 1981
 Occupational Health Services (Geneva), 1985
 International Convention on Climate Change
(Kyoto Protocol), 1997
 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
(New York), 1992
 International Convention on Civil Liability for
Oil Pollution Damage (Brussels), 1969
 Convention on Oil Pollution (London), 1990
 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
(Montague Bay), 1982

--- Page 62 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 53/54




Relevant local regulation
Relevant international treaties and conventions
for which Bangladesh is a signatory
 National Occupational Health and Safety
Policy, 2013
 National Policy for Safe Water Supply and
Sanitation, 1998
 Labour Relations under Labour Laws, 1996
 Industrial Relations Ordinance, 1969
 National Child Labour Elimination Policy,
2010
 The Factories Act, 1965
 Bangladesh Factory Rules, 1979
 The Employees State Insurance Act, 1948
 The Employer’s Liability Act, 1938
 Maternity Benefit Act, 1939
 Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923
 The Employment of Children Act, 1938
 National 3-R Strategy on Waste
Management, 2010 (3R: Reduce, Reuse
and Recycle)
 Hazardous Waste and Ship-Breaking Waste
Management Rules, 2010
 Biomedical Waste Management Rules,
2008
 National River Conservation Commission
Act, 2013
 Disaster Management Act, 2012
 Public
Health
(Emergency
Provisions ) Ordinance, 1994
 Climate Change Trust Fund Act, 2010
 National Plan for Disaster Management
2010-2015
 Water Supply and Sewerage Authority
Ordinance, 1963
 Noise Pollution (Control) Rules, 2006
 National Health Policy, 2011
 National Land Use Policy, 2011
 The Land Acquisition Act, 1894
 The
Acquisition
and
Requisition
of
Immovable Property Ordinance, 1982
 Civil Liability on Transport of Dangerous
Goods (Geneva), 1989
 Protocol on Biological Safety (Cartagena
Protocol), 2000
 International
Plant
Protection
Convention
(Rome), 1951
 World Cultural and Natural Heritage (Paris),
1972
 Convention Relative to the Preservation of
Fauna and Flora in Their Natural
State
(London), 1933
 International Convention for the Protection of
Birds (Paris), 1950
 Convention on Wetlands of International
Importance Especially as Waterfowl Habitat
(Ramsar), 1971
 Convention on The Conservation of Migratory
Species of Wild Animals (Bonn), 1979
 Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio de
Janeiro), 1992
 Convention
on
International
Trade
in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
 UN Convention on The Law of The Sea
(Montague Bay), 1982

--- Page 63 ---
Sustainable Finance Policy for Banks and Financial Institutions
Page 54/54




Relevant local regulation
Relevant international treaties and conventions
for which Bangladesh is a signatory
 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action
Plan of Bangladesh, 2016-2021
 Wildlife (Conservation and Security) Act,
2012 (No. XXX).
 Bangladesh Wild Life (Preservation)
(Amendment) Act, 1974 (Act No. XVII of
1974).
 Bangladesh Biosafety Rules (BR), 2012
 The Forest Act, 1927
 Social Forestry Rules, 2004
 Draft National Forest Policy, 2016
 The Private Forests Ordinance, 1959
 Forest Product Transit Rule, 2011
 Bangladesh Spotted Deer Rearing Policy
2009
 The Protection and Conservation of Fish
Act 1950
 The Protection and Conservation of Fish
Rules (1985)
 Bangladesh National Conservation Strategy
(2016-2031)
 Private Fisheries Protection Act 1889
 Marine Fisheries Ordinance, 1983
 Bangladesh Environment Conservation
(Amendment) Act 2010
 The Antiquities Act, 1968