--- Page 1 ---
Agricultural & Rural Credit Policy and Programme
for the FY 2014-2015



























Agricultural Credit & Financial Inclusion Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh

--- Page 2 ---
ii

Bangladesh Bank
(Central Bank of Bangladesh)
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh
www.bb.org.bd

06 Shrabon, 1421
ACFID Circular letter No.: 01 Date: --------------------
21 July, 2014

Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh and
BRDB

Dear Sir,

Agricultural & Rural Credit Policy and Programme
for the Fiscal Year 2014-2015

The Agriculture & Rural Credit Policy and Programme for the Fiscal Year 2014-2015
has been declared (attached herewith).

All Scheduled banks are advised to instruct their concerned officials to follow and
implement the Agricultural & Rural Credit Policy and Programme. Besides, Banks are
instructed to inform Agricultural Credit and Financial Inclusion Department (ACFID)
about the sector/sub-sector based, branch-wise and Micro Finance Institution (MFI)
based (where applicable) comprehensive credit target under their own disbursement
target programme within 20 August, 2014.

This Policy and Programme will be effective from 1st July, 2014.


Yours sincerely,
Attachment: 65 Pages

(Provash Chandra Mallick)
General Manager
Phone: 9530138


Agricultural Credit &
Financial Inclusion Department

--- Page 3 ---
iii


INDEX


Page No
1.0
Introduction……………………………………………………………………...
2.0
Review of the Agricultural/Rural Credit Policy and Programme for the Fiscal
Year 2013-2014…………………………………………………………………


2.01. Target and Achievement of previous FY 2013-2014……………………..

2.02. Implementation of Initiatives taken in FY 2013-14……………………….

2.03. Agricultural and Rural Development Allied Activities…………………...

2.04. Supportive Role in Implementing Monetary Policy………………………
3.0
Target for Agricultural & Rural Credit Disbursement for the FY 2014-2015…..
4.0
Salient Features of the Agricultural & Rural Credit Policy and Programme for
the FY 2014-2015……………………………………………………………….

5.0
Methods of Agricultural & Rural Credit Disbursement………………………...

5.01. Identifying Real Farmers/Borrowers……………………………………...

5.02. Eligibility of the Borrowers……………………………………………….

5.03. Simplification of Application Form……………………………………….

5.04. Acceptance, Acknowledgement and Consideration of Application Form..

5.05. Application Processing Fee/Charge……………………………………….

5.06. Maximum Limit for Agricultural Credit…………………………………..
10

5.07. CIB Reporting & CIB Inquiry…………………………………………….
10

5.08. Security/Collateral………………………………………………………...
10

5.09. Area Allocation for Disbursement of Agricultural Credit………………...
10

5.10. Pass Book for Agricultural Loan………………………………………….
10

5.11. Credit Disbursement in Due Time as per Crop Production
Calendar……........................................................................................................

10

5.12. Mixed Cropping/Inter-Cropping/Relay Cropping………………………..
11

5.13. Crop Diversification………………………………………………………
11

5.14. Uses of Area Approach Method…………………………………………..
11

5.15. Credit for Core Agricultural Sectors………………………………………
11

5.16. Disbursement of Agricultural Credit in a Transparent Manner…………...
11

5.17. Credit disbursement through Tk. 10/- Farmer‟s Account as a part of
financial inclusion and encourage the farmers to keep these accounts
operative…………………………………………………………………..


11

5.18. Revolving Crop Credit Limit System……………………………………..
12

5.19. Credit to the Farmers/Entrepreneurs engaged in Contract Farming………
12

5.19.1. Condition to be mentioned in the contract………………………...
13

5.19.2. Qualification of the entrepreneur………………………………..
5.19.3. Other Conditions………………...………………………………..
5.19.4. Reporting………………………...………………………………..

13
14
14

5.20. Agricultural and Rural Credit Activities through Partnership with MFIs
approved by MRA………………………………………………………..
14

--- Page 4 ---
iv


5.21. Outsourcing in Disbursing and Recovering Agricultural and Rural Credit.
15
6.0
Agricultural and Rural Credit Programme………………………………………
15

6.01. Sectors/Sub-sectors under the Programme………………………………..
15

6.02. Credit Norms and Determination of Credit Limit………………………...
16

6.03. Determination of target for disbursement of Agricultural & Rural credit
and its implementation……………………………………………………

16

6.03.1 Allocation of Fund for Crop Loan…………………………………
17

6.04. Credit for Fisheries sector Development………………………………….
17

6.04.1. Credit for Fish Cultivation………………………………………...
17

6.04.2. Credit for Purchasing Fishing Equipments by the Fishermen in
Coastal Belts……………………………………………………………...

18

6.04.3. Credit for Fish Cultivation in Water Reservoir/Jalmohal/Haor…...
18

6.04.4. Credit for Fish Cultivation in Cage………………………………..
18

6.04.5. Credit for Aquaculture in Coastal Areas…………………………..
18

6.05. Credit for Animal Resources Development……………………………….
19

6.05.1. Cattle………………………………………………………………
19

6.05.2. Poultry Sector……………………………………………………..
19

6.06. Credit for Agricultural and Irrigation Equipments………………………..
20

6.06.1. Credit for Purchasing Harvester…………………………………...
20

6.06.2. Credit for Purchasing Solar Energy Driven Irrigation Pump……...
20

6.07. Green Financing in Agricultural Sector…………………………………...
20

6.07.1. Credit for Integrated Cow rearing (including beef fattening) and
Bio-gas Plant……………………………………………………………..
20

6.07.2. Solar Energy……………………………………………………….
21

6.07.3. Credit for Vermicompost Production……………………………..
21

6.07.4. Special fund of ADB for environment friendly brick kiln…………
21

6.08. Credit to the real farmers for crop warehousing and marketing…………..
22

6.09 Finance in High Value Crops (HVCs)……………………………………..
22

6.10. Credit for Tissue Culture………………………………………………….
22

6.11. Credit for Jute Cultivation………………………………………………...
22

6.12. Credit for Oil Palm Cultivation…………………………………………...
23

6.13. Credit for Establishment of Nursery………………………………………
23

6.14. Special/Priority Sectors……………………………………………………
24

6.14.1. Credit Disbursement at Concessional Interest Rate for Specified
Crops……………………………………………………………………..

24

6.14.2. Credit for Salt cultivation at concessional interest rate……………
26

6.14.3. Credit for Betel Leaf Cultivation………………………………….
26

6.14.4. Credit for Apiculture……………………………………………….
26

6.14.5. Credit for Less Developed and Neglected Areas on Priority Basis..
27

6.14.6. Financing Marginal, Small and Sharecroppers…………………….
27

6.14.7. Credit for Successful Farmers……………………………………...
27

6.14.8. Credit for Mushroom Cultivation………………………………….
28

6.14.9. Credit for Silk Industry…………………………………………….
28

--- Page 5 ---
6.14.10. Credit for Cotton Cultivation……………………………………..
28

6.14.11. Rural Finance.…………………………………………………….
28

6.14.12. Credit for Weaving Industry……………………………………..
29

6.14.13. Credit for Women Associated with Income Generating
Agriculture and Agriculture Allied Activities……………………………

29

6.14.14. Credit for Physically Handicapped People……………………….
29
7.0
Special Credit Programmes in Supporting of Agricultural and Rural
Development…………………………………………………………………….

29

7.01. Special Credit Programme of Bangladesh Bank for Sharecroppers………
29
8.0
Special Credit Programmes in Supporting of Agricultural and Rural
Development financed by ADB…………………………………………………

30

8.01. North-West Crop Diversification Project (NCDP)………………………..
30

8.02 Second Crop Diversification Project (SCDP)……………………………...
30
9.0
Interest Rate of Agricultural Loan………………………………………………
31
10.0
Use of Information Technology in Agricultural Credit Management…………..
31
11.0
Monitoring of Agricultural and Rural Credit……………………………………
31

11.01. Monitoring at Bank Level………………………………………………..
31

11.02. Monitoring at Central Bank Level……………………………………….
32

11.03. Service from “Customers Interest Protection Center” in Bangladesh
Bank……………………………………………………………………...

33

11.04. Monitoring by District Agricultural Credit Committee………………….
33
12.0
Agricultural and Rural Credit Recovery………………………………………...
35

12.01. Importance of Agriculture and Rural Credit Recovery………………….
35

12.02. Awareness related to Agricultural and Rural Credit Recovery………….
35

12.03. Special Initiatives for Agricultural and Rural Credit Recovery…………
35
13.0
Availability of Agricultural and Rural Credit Related Information…………….
35
14.0
Addressing the Adverse Effects of Climate Change……………………………
35
15.0
Awareness and Training………………………………………………………...
38
16.0
Submission of Statements……………………………………………………….
38
17.0
Incentives in case of success in Agricultural and Rural Credit Programme…….
38
18.0
Banks‟ own Agricultural and Rural Credit Policy and Programme…………….
38
19.0
Agriculture Friendly other Special Programmes Directed by Bangladesh Bank.
38

19.1. Special Credit Programmes in Developing Agro-processing Industry……
38

19.2. Equity and Entrepreneurship Fund (EEF) ………………………………..
19.3. Refinance Scheme of 200 Crore Taka From Bangladesh Bank‟s Own
Source for Purchasing Jute with a view to give assistance to Jute Sector|…..
19.4. Refinance Scheme for Tk 10/- account holding small/marginal/landless
farmers/natural calamity affected low earning people and marginal/small
businessmen…………………………………………………………………...
39

40


40




Annexure-„A‟ to Annexure-„I‟
41-65

--- Page 6 ---
Agricultural & Rural Credit Policy and Programme for the Fiscal Year 2014-2015
1.0. Introduction:
Agriculture is an important sector of the economy of Bangladesh. The contribution of
Agricultural sector to the overall GDP of the country is almost 19%. Food security for the
huge population of Bangladesh is directly related to the development of farmers and
agricultural sector. So the government of Bangladesh has been giving priority to agricultural
development with a view to ensure food security and nutrition, poverty eradication and
employment generation. It has been possible to remain an average GDP growth of 6.3 in last
five fiscal years for agriculture friendly programmes of the government and inclusive growth
strategy of Bangladesh Bank. Agriculture has also an important role in increasing the
domestic demand. For this reason Bangladesh could face the world recession comparatively
in a better manner than the other countries. At present, almost 70% of total populations of
Bangladesh live in the rural areas. They are mainly dependent on agricultural and rural
income generating activities for their livelihood. So, through development of agricultural
sector, it is possible to create employment opportunity, ensure food & nutrition security for
such a huge population and by this way we could make our national economy more
sustainable and stronger. Moreover, agricultural and rural credit is an important instrument
for agricultural and rural development. Besides, agricultural credit has been playing an
important role to keep the food-price inflation in a tolerable level as well as implementing the
monetary policy of Bangladesh Bank.

GDP growth rate of 7.3% has been set up for the FY 2014-15 in the national budget.
In order to achieve this target as well as to fulfill the Millennium Developmental Goal
(MDG), it is important to increase the domestic food grain production. National economy
becomes strong and healthy as the agricultural production becomes well. On the other hand
poor agricultural production results in poverty and hunger. It has already been proved that,
international market is not always a reliable source to depend on during the food and food-
grain crisis in domestic market. For this reason, enhancement of domestic agricultural
production is very important. Achieving expected food/agricultural production by utilizing
the limited land efficiently is one of the prime-movers for the economic stability and
development of Bangladesh. In parallel, ensuring timely supply of agricultural input such as
proper seed, fertilizer, pesticides and irrigation is the precondition of gaining expected
production. But most of the farmers do not have adequate ability to invest in agriculture.
Considering the matter, it is essential to extend agricultural credit timely to the small,
marginal farmers and sharecroppers, so that they can procure the agricultural inputs properly.
In last few years, private and foreign banks have come forward to disburse agricultural and
rural credit in parallel with the state owned commercial and specialized banks. Private and
foreign banks which have limited branch network coverage in rural areas, may distribute
agricultural and rural credit through a partnership with Micro-credit Finance Institute (MFIs).

Natural calamities such as global warming, irregular rainfall, increase of salinity etc.
created from the adverse effect of climate changes have been making our agriculture more
challenging day by day. To cope with the challenges it is necessary to invent new high
yielding crop variety on which our future agricultural production and food security also

--- Page 7 ---
depending. Besides, lack of proper planning and mechanization in agriculture, use of
fertilizer and pesticides in an unplanned manner etc. are the barrier towards the sustainable
agricultural production. Excessive use of chemical fertilizer may help to increase the crop
production temporarily but in the long run it is decreasing the fertility of the soil which is a
threat to future agricultural production. To overcome the situation it is necessary to increase
the use of environment friendly bio-fertilizer. As a whole, for the integrated development of
the agriculture of Bangladesh, it is necessary to extension of shallow irrigation facility in
different region, elimination of water logged condition, developed and distribution of HYV
seed production, invention of new climate adaptable crop variety and technology and its
extension. To provide food for the increasing population of the country, it is mandatory to
formulate a concurrent policy and to take an integrated initiative by all concerned people for
agriculture.

In line with the agriculture-friendly policy of the government, the Agriculture & Rural
Credit Policy and Programme for the Fiscal Year 2014-2015 has been formulated. In addition
to adopt the main features of the last year‟s (FY 2013-2014) Agricultural Credit Policy and
Programme, the new policy (FY 2014-2015) includes certain additional features. Some of
these features are relating to increasing the scope of agricultural and rural credit, refinancing
scheme facility for farmers holding Tk. 10/- account, extra incentive to the cultivation of
export oriented crops, providing information for new crops and technologies as well as to
preservation of different crops including potato, financing in vermi-compost, providing a
wide list of environmentally sustainable crops to face the adverse effect of climate change
etc. The main objective of the policy is to ensure the food security and nutrition for the
people through establishment a profitable, environment-friendly and sustainable agricultural
system by the invention and hand-over of new technologies, increase of input management
capability and financing in agricultural activities. The policy includes directions for the banks
to follow. It is expected that, this policy will help the farmers to achieve desired level of
agricultural production and at the same time will increase the credit supply in favor of the
farmers, alleviate poverty in rural areas and enhance the living standard of the rural people.

2.0. Review of the Agricultural/Rural Credit Policy and Programme for the Fiscal Year
2013-2014
The Agricultural/Rural Credit Policy and Programme for the FY 2013-2014 was declared
with disbursement target of Tk.14,595 crore with a view to ensuring food security and
alleviating rural poverty through escalating the scope of agricultural credit, financial
inclusion, expanding banking services to rural areas using information technology and
increased fund flow in rural areas. Under this policy, adequate credit has also been allocated
for two other main sub-sectors of Agriculture- Fishery and Livestock alongside the crop sub-
sector including income generating and poverty alleviation activities in rural areas,
agriculture allied sectors.

--- Page 8 ---
2.01. Target and Achievement of previous FY 2013-2014
During the FY 2013-2014, 04 (four) State-owned Commercial Banks, 03 (three) Specialized
Banks, 38 (thirty eight) Private Commercial Banks, 09 (nine) Foreign Banks have disbursed a
total amount of agricultural/rural credit of Tk. 16,036.81 crore or 109.88% of the total target.
The amount disbursed is higher by Tk. 1,369.32 crore or 9.34% compared to that of FY 2012-
2013. Besides, BRDB has disbursed Tk. 644.96 crore as agricultural/rural credit during FY
2013-2014. It is to be noted that, some of the private banks have already built up their
capacity through establishing separate Agriculture/Rural Credit Division/Department and
deployed skilled manpower.
2.02. Implementation of Initiatives taken in FY 2013-2014
During FY 2013-2014, a total of 32,85,936 farmers have received Agriculture/Rural
Credit, out of which 5,89,942 are women who received almost Tk. 1,612.21 crore.
With a view to disbursing loans in a transparent way, various banks arranged to
disburse loan in open gathering at union level in presence of local public
representatives, agricultural officers, teachers and other respectable persons. During FY
2013-2014, around Tk. 759.27 crore agricultural credits was disbursed among 2.34 lakh
farmers through 15,862 open credit disbursement programmes arranged by different
banks.
During FY 2013-2014, around 24.85 lakh small and marginal farmers received Tk.
10,648.88 crore agricultural credits from different banks.
During FY 2013-2014, different banks distributed about Tk. 48.36 crore
agricultural/rural credits among 23,976 farmers living in the less developed area of
haor, char, etc.
During FY 2013-14, 619 successful farmers received Tk.9.10 crore agricultural credits
from different banks.
Around 97 lakh accounts of farmers have been opened by the State-owned Commercial
Banks with an initial deposit of Tk. 10/- only. Apart from disbursing government
subsidy through these accounts, banks are advised to use this accounts in disbursing
agricultural credit, obtaining saving and withdrawal services, remittance services, etc.
Bangladesh Bank is monitoring the use of these accounts regularly.
Farmers became interested gradually in cultivating import substitute crops (such as
pulses, oilseed, spices and maze) due to the massive promotional activities regarding
agricultural credit disbursement (at a concessional 4% interest rate for the aforesaid
crops) programme done by Bangladesh Bank. During FY 2013-14 an amount of
Tk.80.66 crore has been disbursed in this sector. As a result, production of these crops
has enhanced locally and the price of those crops in domestic markets is also
responding accordingly. It may be noted that, the total amount disbursed in this sector
during FY 2012-13 was Tk. 74.90 crore.
During FY 2013-14, almost Tk. 77.12crore was disbursed at 5% interest rate only
among 18,097 tribal farmers in the 3 (three) Hill Tracts Districts of Chittagong.

--- Page 9 ---
During FY 2013-14 an amount of Tk. 1.79 crore, Tk. 21.28 crore and Tk. 3.22 crore has
been disbursed for solar energy driven irrigation pump, integrated cow rearing & bio-
gas plant and solar home system respectively.
A Customers‟ Interests Protection Center (CIPC) has been established in Bangladesh
Bank to address customer complaints about harassment/problems faced in receiving
Agricultural and other credit from the banking sector. The hot line number for the
center is 16236. Any complaints received by the center regarding Agricultural and
Rural credit have been addressed promptly so far and will be addressed promptly in
future.
Apart from preserving the mobile phone numbers of agricultural credit borrowers in the
bank branches, monitoring activities related to the disbursement of agricultural and
rural credit have been strengthen by both the concerned banks and Bangladesh bank.

2.03. Agricultural and Rural Development Allied Activities
During 2013-2014, Tk. 450 crore agricultural credit has been disbursed under the
special refinance programme of Bangladesh Bank in 250 upazillas of 48 districts
through BRAC to about 2 lakh sharecroppers those who were outside the orbit of bank
credit facilities.
North-west Crops Diversification Project (NCDP) undertaken to alleviate poverty by
producing high value crops instead of traditional farming from the north-western part of
Bangladesh ended in 30 June 2009. As a consequence of the success achieved through
this project, a revolving fund of Tk. 174 crore has been arranged as per the condition of
the contract under the management and supervision of Bangladesh Bank. Under this
scheme, Rajshahi Krishi Unnayan Bank is distributing Agricultural credit through
wholesaling arrangement with 4 MFIs (BRAC, Proshika, RDRS and GKF) to 1.86 lakh
farmers (60% of whom are women) with 02. To 1.2 hector of land from 16 districts and
61 upazilas of Rajshahi and Rangpur division.
Similar to the NCDP, agricultural credit has been disbursed to capable farmers by
Eastern Bank ltd. and BASIC Bank ltd. through wholesaling arrangement with BRAC
during last Fiscal Year (2012-2013) under the Second Crop Diversification Project
(SCDP). The credit component allocated to this project is Tk. 203 crore which is
equivalent to 26 million US dollar. Bangladesh Bank has distributed 143 (One Hundred
and Forty Three) Crore taka to the two participating Banks.
In order to overcome the escalating energy crisis and environmental pollution related
problem Bangladesh Bank has organized a revolving fund of Tk. 200 crore for
refinancing with simple conditions in sectors like Solar energy, Bio-gas, and Waste
Treatment Plant. During FY 2013-14, Tk. 3.22 crore and Tk. 1.79 crore has been
refinanced in establishing solar home system in 1104 homes and establishing 8 Solar
Energy driven irrigation pumps respectively. As a result, 662 bigha lands will be
brought under irrigation and number of beneficiary farmers will be 80. Besides, an
amount of Tk. 21.28 crore has also been refinanced in establishing 758 integrated cow

--- Page 10 ---
rearing and bio-gas plant (4 cows and 1 bio-gas plant model). A refinance scheme
facility of Tk. 150.35 crore had been disbursed to renewable energy sector in during FY
2013-14.
2.04. Supportive Role in Implementing Monetary Policy
Despite the prolongation of global recession, it became possible to achieve an average GDP
growth rate of 6% during the last five years from 2009-10 to 2013-14 mainly due to the fiscal
policy and development initiatives taken by the government and the measured and sensible
monetary policy taken by Bangladesh Bank. Due to the proficient implementation of the
monetary policy by Bangladesh Bank, the inflation rate has dropped to a tolerable one digit in
last FY 2013-14. It may be noted that, food price inflation was showing declining trend at the
end of the financial year. Food production helped very much in this success. Though the
amount cultivable land has been decreasing due to pressure by increasing population, the
sequel increase in agricultural production remains unchanged. Rice production become three
times higher than that of post liberation period, eventually Bangladesh did not require
importing any rice during the last three years. Moreover, the country now enjoys a food grain
reserve of 10 lakh ton after meeting its domestic demands. Agricultural production has also
shown a positive impact on the non-agricultural sector along with the crop sector. Due to the
increase in all type of economic activities in rural areas, the domestic demand of the country
has risen and as a result the domestic market has been expanded.
3.0. Target for Agricultural & Rural Credit Disbursement for the FY 2014-15
A target of Tk. 15,550 (Fifteen Thousands Five Hundred and Fifty) Crore has been set up for
this fiscal year considering the increasing demand of the agricultural and rural credit. This
target is proposed considering the target of state owned commercial and specialized banks set
by themselves and at 2 % amount of the total loans and advance of the private and foreign
banks again 5 % amount of the total loans and advance of newly started 9 private banks. This
new target is 6.54% higher than the target set during FY 2013-14. In addition to that,
Bangladesh Rural Development Board (BRDB) will disburse Taka 674.10 crore from their
own funding as agricultural and rural credit.
4.0. Salient Features of the Agricultural & Rural Credit Policy and Programme for the
FY 2014-2015
Despite of having the provision to disburse 2.5% of the net loans and advances of Private
and Foreign Commercial Banks, the target amount is determined as 2% (under special
consideration of their capacity and shortage of rural branches as previous FY) of their
net loans and advances as on 31st March 2014. This is 5 % amount of the total loans and
advance for 9 new private banks. This agricultural and rural credit disbursement target
must have to attain. After setting such lower target in this way, banks those will fail to
achieve their credit disbursement target, must have to be deposited the unachieved
portion of the target to Bangladesh Bank for one year. However, the bank will receive
interest on the bank rate for such deposit.

--- Page 11 ---
According to the Agricultural/Rural Credit Policy and Programme, priority has to be
given to the 3 core sectors viz. Crop, Fishery and Livestock over other sectors.
The credit application form has to be simplified for the potentially capable borrowers
(farmers).
The loan applications of the farmers have to be acknowledged. The loan applications
which cannot be considered shall have to inform the farmers via a letter mentioning the
cause of rejection. Also, it should be recorded in a separate register.
In order to avoid the delay in filling up the application, all necessary information should
be delivered to the client during the time of receiving the application. Any additional
information needed should be informed to the customer in one sitting.
The loan applications for cultivation of crops shall be processed within earliest time. The
maximum time limit for such processing will be 10 working days.
In order to encourage normal banking transaction (like credit disbursement, savings,
remittance etc.) through farmer's account (taka 10/- account) in different banks as a part
of financial inclusion, the deduction of excise duty up to taka 1 lac of debit/credit
balance of these accounts has been exempted; A circular letter, dated 6/11/2012
concerning to mobilize the usage of these farmer‟s account has been issued. BB will
continue to monitor (offsite) on the utilization progress of these accounts quarterly basis;
In order to disburse agricultural and rural credit to the farmers on a timely manner, CIB
reporting and CIB inquiry will not be needed for short term agricultural credit up to Tk.
1.5 lakh.
Credit shall be disbursed following area approach method considering the comparative
advantages of producing certain crops in certain regions.
The main objective of this policy is to ensure timely availability of necessary amount of
agricultural credit for the small and marginal farmers including share-croppers.
Comparatively less developed and neglected areas (i.e. char, haor, coastal belts etc.) shall
be given priority for disbursing agricultural credit.
Emphasis shall be given on disbursing agricultural loans in a transparent way, to do so
banks may arrange to disburse loan in open gathering at union level in presence of local
public representatives, agricultural officers, teachers and other respectable persons. If
needed, bank officer may publicize agri. credit related information and also disburse
credit in the days of local „haat‟.
Banks shall have to organize an effective monitoring system to ensure timely and hassle
free disbursement of necessary credit to real farmers and 100% achievement of the target
of agriculture credit.
Agricultural credit has to be provided to the real farmers (small, marginal and
sharecropper) individually or in a group following simple process.
To ensure fair price of agricultural products, credit shall be made available to real
farmers for crop storage and marketing activity against the crops pledged/stored in the
warehouse.

--- Page 12 ---
Successful farmers shall be provided with necessary credit so that other farmers may get
encouraged with their success.
To ensure balanced participation of all the banks including private and foreign
commercial banks in disbursing credit towards the production of pulse, oilseed, spices
and maize, the interest rate (concessional) at the farmer level has been increased to 4%
from FY 2011-12. This credit facility shall be disbursed at a concessional rate (4%) to
reduce the dependency on huge import of said items. The payment process of interest
subsidy has been simplified with a view to settle the bank's claim promptly;
Any farmer, if not defaulter in any case, will be eligible for the credit of aforesaid
concessional 4% interest rate;
Necessary credit should be given to agriculture allied sectors such as irrigation
equipments and other equipments.
Credit should be disbursed for generating power through establishing bio-gas plant (from
poultry/dairy farm).
Credit should be disbursed for establishing solar home system and solar energy driven
irrigation pump.
Alongside the credit to agricultural and its allied sectors, credit shall be provided
individually or group basis for different self-employment/income generating activities in
order to stimulate the rural economy.
Due to less number of branches, foreign and many private commercial banks are
disbursing agricultural credit through MFI partnership. Therefore, foreign and private
commercial banks are instructed to supervise onsite on a quarterly basis 1-2% of the
borrower to whom credits disbursed, analyzing these inspection reports, Bangladesh
Bank will also carry out field inspection on a random sampling basis to ensure accuracy
in those reports and also in agricultural and rural credit activities.
Women borrowers shall be given priority for disbursing agricultural and rural credit.
Achievement of the agricultural and rural credit target will be considered as the success
of the bank management. Thus this achievement will be considered as a positive
yardstick in the approval process of opening new branches, authorized foreign exchange
branches and exchange houses in foreign countries. Moreover, the success in disbursing
agricultural credit will considered in CAMELS rating of the bank along with other
factors. Agricultural Financing Performance such as target achievement, loan
disbursement in crop sector, credit at 4% concessional rate, disbursement through own
branches and recovery rate will be considered as the indicators in rating point of
Management Component of CAMELS rating. Also the well-performed banks in
disbursing agricultural and rural credit will get preference in special liquidity support
program.
The District Agricultural Credit Committee (DACC) headed by the Deputy
Commissioner (DC) in every district has to be more active.
All foreign and private commercial banks have been instructed to participate their
nominated personnel in the District Agricultural Credit Committee meetings.

--- Page 13 ---
Banks have to follow the guidelines issued for implementing the agricultural and rural
credit programme in partnership with MFIs licensed by Micro-credit Regulatory
Authority (MRA).
Banks may implement Agriculture and Rural Credit Programme through outsourcing.
In order to show adequate attention on 100% disbursement and recovery of agricultural
and rural credit, the use of information technology and mobile phone in agricultural
credit system shall be encouraged.
High Value Crops shall be given priority in extending credit facility.
In case of contract farming, the farmers will be allowed agricultural credit against taking
guarantee from the respective entrepreneur (the contractor). Besides, in order to ensure
the timely supply of agricultural and rural credit equipment to the farmers, agricultural
credit may be disbursed after approval from BB in favor of the agro-based industry at the
farmer/entrepreneur level under contract farming arrangement.
In order to adapt to the climate change, the schedule of credit disbursement and recovery
may be adjusted with the local needs. Side by side, credit should be facilitated for the
entrepreneurship to cultivate salt tolerant crops in salty areas, water tolerant crops in
water-logging and flood prone areas, draught tolerant crops in draught prone areas,
which will help to adapt to the climate change.
Credit shall be made available on simple terms to the salt cultivators in the coastal belts
of the country. Under the government interest subsidy benefit, the salt cultivating
farmers will be provided credit at concessional 4% interest rate.
Banks themselves shall have to take necessary initiatives to create awareness and impart
training on agricultural and rural credit policy and programme.
Banks may establish separate recovery cell for recovery of loans in order to avoid
liquidity crisis and to ensure best use of the fund.
In disbursing agricultural and rural credit priority should be given to the farmers
cultivating non-arable land.

5.0. Methods of Agricultural & Rural Credit Disbursement
5.01. Identifying Real Farmers/Borrowers
The real farmers/borrowers may be identified through the verification of their National ID
Card and Agricultural Inputs Assistance Card. The farmers, who opened bank account at TK.
10 to avail of agricultural inputs assistance, may be identified just on the basis of the „pass
book‟ of their bank account. The farmer who has National ID Card but has no Agricultural
Inputs Assistance Card may be allowed loan accepting the certificate issued by the Union
Parishad Chairman or by the Headmaster/Principal of local school/college or by the
acceptable person to the bank.

--- Page 14 ---
5.02. Eligibility of the Borrowers
Farmers directly involved in agriculture, shall be considered eligible for agricultural credit.
People who are engaged in income generating activities in rural areas are also eligible for
credit facility in the concerned sectors of agricultural and rural credit. But, generally any loan
defaulter will not be eligible to get new loan.
5.03. Simplification of Application Form
Application Form for the agricultural credit should be simplified as far as possible to
encourage the farmers in large numbers towards bank credit. The banks shall take initiatives
to simplify the Application Form especially for crop loan keeping in view to the educational
qualification of the farmers, necessary time to fill in the form, usefulness of the information
sought in the form. In order to reduce delay in filling up Loan Application Form and other
related jobs all necessary instructions shall be given to the applicant at the time of distribution
of the Application Form. In respect of agricultural credit, customer service at maximum level
is to be ensured. Again, all supplementary queries, if needed, shall be made in one instance.
Banks should take necessary steps to make application Form for the agricultural credit more
available for the farmers.
5.04. Acceptance, Acknowledgement and Consideration of Application Form
The concerned bank branches will sanction crops loan or other loans in one instance
according to the annual requirements of the borrower in accordance with the credit norms.
However, all necessary preparations for disbursement of loan shall be completed at least 15
(fifteen) days before the season starts for a particular crop. For this purpose, the concerned
bank branches shall collect an annual production plan along with the loan application from
each farmer. If necessary, farmers may be allowed to modify their production plan on
reasonable grounds.
Each application form received from the borrower will be acknowledged. The time gap
between sanctioning and disbursement of loan should be rationalized. The complaints, if any,
received from the applicants shall be addressed promptly. In that case, loan application for
crop production should be processed within 10 working days.
The rejected loan applications shall be recorded in a separate register and preserved for
inspection by the inspection team of Bangladesh Bank and the auditors of the respective
banks.
5.05. Application Processing Fee/Charge
Account can be opened by depositing Tk 10/- only against farmer‟s application. To operate
this kind of account the conditions noted in article 5.17 should be followed. Any fee will not
be charged for processing of loan application by Banks/MFIs disbursing credit partnership
with Banks.

--- Page 15 ---
10

5.06. Maximum Limit for Agricultural Credit
The maximum limit of crop loan shall be the amount stipulated in the credit norms for
cultivation of 15 bighas (5 acres or 2 hectors) of land. But for cultivation of sugarcane and
potato, the maximum limit shall be the amount stipulated in the credit norms for cultivation
of 2.5 acres of land. Banks may, however, consider loan application for cultivation of larger
size following this policy and programme of land under their own terms and conditions.
5.07. CIB Reporting & CIB Inquiry
CIB reporting and CIB inquiry does not required in case of short term agricultural credit of
TK. 1.5 lakh only for crop cultivation. But respective banks must have to ensure about not to
disburse any loan to any defaulter.
5.08. Security/Collateral
Normally credit for cultivation of crops up to 5 acres (2.5 acres in case of cultivation of
sugarcane and potato) shall be provided only against hypothecation of crops without any
collateral. However, the question of collateral security to provide credit for cultivation of
crops exceeding 5 acres of land and for sugarcane/potato exceeding 2.5 acres of land may be
considered under existing terms and conditions of the bank and based on banker-customer
relationship. Personal/Group guarantee can be considered in providing credit to income
generating activities under this agricultural and rural credit programme.
5.09. Area Allocation for Disbursement of Agricultural Credit
Under the „Lead Bank‟ system respective bank branches shall disburse their credit in crops
and other agricultural sectors to the unions allotted to them. However, credit may be provided
to the applicants of the adjacent union against submission of “no objection” certificate from
the respective bank branches. For this purpose, nearby branches of the area may exchange the
borrower list among themselves. As disbursement of agricultural credit is compulsory for all
scheduled banks including private and foreign banks operating in Bangladesh at present, the
private and foreign banks shall disburse agricultural and rural credit to the borrowers of a
union allotted to a particular branch under „Lead Bank‟ system upon obtaining “no objection”
certificate from the respective bank branch.
5.10. Pass Book for Agricultural Loan
Pass book is a mandatory requirement for disbursing credit under agricultural credit
programmes. As such, all rules and regulations in this regard must be fully complied with.
Credit shall be provided to new borrowers by issuing a passbook. It may be mentioned that
bank statement can be accepted as alternative of pass book.
5.11. Credit Disbursement in Due Time as per Crop Production Calendar
In order to facilitate disbursement, monitoring and recovery of loan properly and timely by
the bank branches, a crop calendar has been attached in annexure „F‟. However, banks may
change schedule of disbursement and recovery considering the local factors. Disbursement of
credit may be delayed up to a reasonable time to address the regional variation in standard

--- Page 16 ---
11

sowing/plantation time and delay in sowing/plantation due to natural calamity or in case of
re-plantation.
5.12. Mixed cropping/Inter-cropping/Relay cropping
Agricultural credit facilities may be provided to the interested farmers for producing Inter-
cropping (jointly cultivatable crops) with main crops in the potential areas. For financing
inter-cropping, the credit norms attached in annexure „G‟ shall be followed. However, for
financing the crops not included in annexure „G‟ banks will take necessary steps in
consultation with the local Agricultural Extension Officer.
5.13. Crop Diversification
In order to make the country self-sufficient in food production and to ensure balanced and
nutritious food supply, it is necessary to increase the production of potato, pulse, oil seeds,
maize etc. through the “crop diversification initiatives” to popularize the multipurpose ways
of consuming these items. Banks/financial institutions will, therefore, give more emphasis on
providing loan to these profitable crops along with their normal loan activities.
5.14. Uses of Area Approach Method
Agricultural credit shall be disbursed following area approach method emphasizing the
comparative advantages of producing certain crops in certain regions. Adequate credit shall
be disbursed for producing vegetables, onion, ginger, garlic, pulse, bau-kul, strawberry, palm,
banana, orange, agor, betel leaf, pepper, potato etc. in the areas suitable for production of the
same. If needed, adequate measures regarding this issue can be taken by collecting the list of
concerned matter from Agricultural Extension Department. Besides, knowledge and
experience acquired through living in the concerned area may be utilized in this regard.
5.15. Credit for Core Agricultural Sectors
The 3 (three) core sectors of agriculture viz. crop, fisheries, and livestock shall be given
priority over other sectors.
5.16. Disbursement of Agricultural Credit in a Transparent Manner
In order to ensure that the real farmers especially the small farmers and sharecroppers get the
agricultural credit, particularly in the crop loans, easily and timely in a transparent manner,
banks shall disburse the loans as far as possible publicly at the union level in presence of
local public representative, concerned agricultural officers, teachers and other locally
renowned persons. If necessary, respective bank branch officers can propagate information
regarding agricultural credit and also disburse credit in the day of local haat/mart.
5.17. Credit disbursement through Tk. 10/- Farmer‟s Account as a part of financial
inclusion and encourages the farmers to keep these accounts operative
Following initiatives are taken to encourage banking activities like credit disbursement,
receive and withdrawal of deposit, remittances and collection of subsidy through this account.

--- Page 17 ---
12

 Agricultural credit will have to disburse through this farmer's account for ensuring
transparency in the agricultural credit related activities.
 Banks will consider 1-2% more interest than the normal savings rate to this accounts
to increase transactions in these accounts.
 The Head office of the concerned bank will set target to their branch manager for
keeping operative of these accounts.
 Banks may collect un-tapped rural savings by encouraging the farmers to deposit their
money from crop selling, their saving amount in these account and make remittance
through these accounts. In this way bank may keep this huge amount of accounts
operative.
 The bank branches may sanction loan up-to 90% of the deposit amount at lower
interest rate.
 These accounts are free from any kind of services charges and maintenance of
minimum balance will not be mandatory for these accounts.
 Deduction of excise duty/levy is exempted from these accounts for the balance up-to
one lakh.
 These accounts will never be marked as inoperative/dormant.
 Cash withdrawal voucher instead of cheque book may provide to the farmers by
taking into consideration the literacy of the farmers. But cheque book will have to
provide in favor of the farmers who desire it.
 Bangladesh Bank has created a Revolving Refinance Fund of 200.00 crore taka from
its own source to disburse loan to the farmers in comparatively easy terms and
conditions with a view to expedite the rural economic activities through activating the
Tk 10/- Account.
It is mentionable here that, as a part of financial inclusion the quarterly reports submission by
banks regarding utilization of 10 Tk. farmers' accounts including depositing the Government
subsidy, will be continued.
5.18. Revolving Crop Credit Limit System
In order to ensure continuous credit flow a 3 (three)-year revolving crop credit limit system
has been introduced. Farmers engaged in continuous crop cultivation will get facilities under
this scheme. Credit will be sanctioned and disbursed by renewing the limit subject to
adjustment of previous crops loan in full and without requiring any further documentation.
Documentation should be as simple as possible. Bank will delegate the power of loan
sanctioning to the manager of the concerned branch. If changes in the production plan and
higher amount of loan are required, the farmers may apply for enhancement of the limit.
Banks will develop and put in place this scheme incorporating the provision for security,
credit limit, rate of interest etc. in line with the Agriculture Credit Policy and Programme.
5.19. Credit to the Farmers/Entrepreneurs engaged in Contract Farming
The contract farming system (mutual contract between growers and enterprises of large
agricultural products processing) may play an important role to reduce the marketing cost as

--- Page 18 ---
13

well as to ensure fair price for the product of the farmers. Due to establishment of agro-
processing industries, increase in export of agro-commodities and creation of additional
demand for domestic consumption, the contract farming system is getting popularity day by
day. Bank may provide credit to the farmer/entrepreneur engaged in contract farming in order
to ensure timely supply of quality raw materials to the producers of juice, chips, chanachur,
poultry feed, cattle feed, fish feed, etc.
5.19.1. Condition to be mentioned in the contract
A valid contract (accomplished in non-judicial stamp paper of Tk.300) between real
farmer/farmers and entrepreneurs/buyers in single or group basis will have to be signed under
contract farming arrangement. Following conditions must be mentioned in the contract:
 The contract must be accomplish before the cultivation of the crops. In case of group
basis contract different contract should be signed for different crop cultivation. That
means one contract will not be valid for a farmer cultivating more than one crop.
Duration of the contract, description of the crops/products, quality of the
crops/products, cultivation method, crops/products supply system, pricing system of
the crops/products, procedure for payment, insurance system (subject to the condition
of introduction of crop insurance) etc. must be mentioned in the contract.
 All the assistance that will be given to the farmers should be mentioned clearly in the
contract. The procedure of adjustment of the credit disbursed in favor of the farmers,
amount of credit and, maximum interest rate of the credit must be mentioned in the
contract.
 Besides, in case of assistance for necessary inputs, (such as seed, fertilizer, pesticides
etc.) name of inputs, amount/quantity, price and repayment system should be
mentioned clearly.
 If produced crops have/do not have the expected quality according to the contract then
how the price of that crop will be determined should be mentioned clearly. If the
farmer sells these crops to a third party then what will be the adjustment system of
credit given to farmers should also be mentioned.
 Besides credit and input, if other assistance such as training, facility of developed
technology usage etc. are provided then is it free of cost or not (in this case price)
must be mentioned in the contract.
 If crops become damaged due to natural disaster, the remedial measure or
compensation system in favor of the farmers must be mentioned in the contract.
5.19.2. Qualification of the entrepreneur or buyer
 Must be a company registered under registrar of joint stock companies and firms;
 Must have experience in preservation, marketing and processing of agricultural
commodities;
 Must have experience to work with the farmers in the field level.

--- Page 19 ---
14

5.19.3. Other Conditions
 It is mentionable here that, a copy of the established contract between the
farmer/farmers and entrepreneur engaged in contract farming must be submitted to the
Agricultural Credit & Financial inclusion Department (ACFID) in order to sanction
loan in favor of the entrepreneur. Banks have to take prior permission from
Bangladesh Bank for sanctioning each loan provided to the entrepreneur.
 The list of farmers will be submitted to ACFID if a group basis contract with them is
done under Contract Farming. The list must include farmers name, address and
mobile phone numbers.
 Under contract farming the actual rate of interest for loan provided in favor of the
farmer will be maximum of 13% and will have to calculate on reducing balance
method.
 Besides, information and account statement of the farmers engaged in contract
farming must be preserved by the enterprises and will have to supply to the concerned
bank on demand.
 Under contract farming loan should be disbursed according to crops credit norms
mentioned in the Agricultural and Rural Credit Policy. In this case, maximum credit
limit per acre should be followed.
 Under contract farming loan should be disbursed in crop production, seed production,
fish cultivation and dairy among the sectors/sub-sectors mentioned in the Agricultural
and Rural Credit Policy.
In this regard it is mentionable that, if needed Bangladesh Bank will do spot-inspection to
examine the proper use of loan under contract farming system. Besides, banks will
provide report to Bangladesh Bank after spot-inspection.
5.19.4. Reporting
Bank should submit detailed statement to the Agricultural Credit and Financial Inclusion
Department according to the format supplied earlier in a quarterly interval regarding
disbursed loan under Contract Farming.
5.20. Agricultural and Rural Credit Activities through Partnership with MFIs approved
by MRA
All scheduled banks including the private and foreign banks operating in Bangladesh have
been compulsorily brought under the Agricultural Credit Programme since the FY 2008-
2009. Private & foreign Banks, having inadequate branches in rural areas, may conduct the
agri-credit operations in partnership with the Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) approved by
Micro Credit Regulatory Authority (MRA) under the following terms and conditions:
The Banks disbursing agri-credit through partnership with MFIs partially or fully shall
have to ensure the receipt of loan by borrower. This policy should be applied in both
partially or fully partnership with MFIs. Concerned Banks and MFIs shall have well
defined work plan and monitoring system in place. However, the concerned Bank shall

--- Page 20 ---
15

be responsible for submitting all required information and statements to Bangladesh
Bank.
The Banks shall consider to provide the credit line to the MFIs on the basis of a credit
proposal submitted by them specifying the amount of loan, probable size of each loan
at borrower level, number of borrowers, tenure, sector/sub-sector, applicable rate of
interest at borrower level, project area (district/upazilla) etc. and shall be incorporated
clearly in the corresponding sanction advice /loan agreement.
While releasing the loan amount at the first installment by the banks, MFIs shall have
to submit a detailed information of financing containing the number of borrowers,
tenure, sector/sub-sector, applicable interest rate at borrower level, project zone
(district/upazilla) etc. to the respective banks and at the time of releasing subsequent
installments they will submit a certificate on each occasion mentioning that previous
loan has been used in agricultural and rural activities properly.
Under the Bank-MFI partnership, the fund released by the bank to the MFIs will be
treated as agricultural and rural credit by Bangladesh Bank only after the disbursement
of the fund to the farmers/borrowers level.
The banks, disbursing the agri/rural credit through MFIs partially or fully, shall ensure
disbursement of 60% of target amount as crop loan as per policy guidelines. For the
purpose, the MFIs shall have to disburse crop loan along with the income generating
and poverty alleviation activities.
f) Banks should be aware of MFIs selection for the welfare of loan utilization as well as
to prevent loan overlapping in case of loan disbursement under MFI linkage.
5.21. Outsourcing in Disbursing and Recovering Agricultural and Rural Credit
The activities of agricultural loan disbursement and recovery need close monitoring. It is
frequently reported that, agricultural loan disbursement and recovery as well as verification
of proper utilization of agricultural loan is hampering due to insufficient manpower. Banks
will have to appoint sufficient manpower in order to solve the problem.
If not possible to appoint regular employees, banks may appoint employees on daily basis (no
work, no pay). Besides, Banks having limited manpower may engage a company/institution
as an agent or intermediary to select borrowers, to prepare loan proposal and to run other
activities related to evaluation, sanctioning, credit disbursement, monitoring, recovery, etc.
for its rural credit operation.
6.0. Agricultural and Rural Credit Programme
The policies for disbursement of credit to different sectors including crop in rural areas under
Agricultural and Rural Credit Programme are as follows:
6.01. Sectors/Sub-sectors under the Programme
The sectors/sub-sectors under the programme are:
 Crops (All crops mentioned in annexure "E" including Rice, Wheat, lentils, oil-seeds
etc.)

--- Page 21 ---
16

 Fisheries
 Livestock
 Agricultural machineries (Loan sanctioned to user level)
 Irrigation equipments (Loan sanctioned to user level)
 Seed production (Loan sanctioned to user level according to annexure "H" and “I” )
 Warehousing & marketing (Only for warehousing and marketing of self cultivated
crops)
 Poverty reduction & Income generating activities (Loan distributed to the rural people
for income generating activities)
 Others (Loan distributed for cultivation of other crops not mentioned in the credit
norms)
The probable crops, fisheries, livestock, agricultural machineries etc. under short and medium
term loan are included in Annexure "A". It is notable that, the sector of Agri.-based industries
is not included in agriculture and rural credit.
6.02. Credit Norms and Determination of Credit Limit
For smooth implementation of the Agricultural & Rural Credit Policy and Programme, the
norms to be followed by the banks/MFIs are as under:
i) Credit norms prepared on the basis of crop-wise cost of inputs and maximum credit
limit per acre received from the Agricultural Extension Department under the Ministry
of Agriculture (Annexure „E‟).
ii) Annual production plan based on “classification/mixed cropping/inter-cropping/relay
cropping” (Annexure „F‟).
iii) “Crop calendar and loan repayment schedule” based on sowing and harvesting season
(Annexure „G‟).
It may be mentioned that, crop-wise loan limit stated in the credit norms may be
increased/decreased up to 10% according to the actual requirements of the farmers. The rental
amount of land described in the credit norms will not be applicable for those farmers who
cultivate their own land.
6.03. Determination of target for disbursement of Agricultural & Rural credit and its
implementation:
The banks will fix sector wise agricultural & rural credit disbursement target with discussion
to their branches. The Govt. owned commercial banks and specialized banks are playing the
major role to disburse agricultural and rural credit by fixing a significant disbursement target
every year. To increase the amount and area of agricultural & rural credit, the participation of
private & foreign commercial banks will have to ensure vis-a-vis Govt. owned commercial
banks and specialized banks.
As a result of participation of private & foreign commercial banks in agriculture and rural
sector the amount of credit disbursement in this sector has been increased which are
contributing to achieve the desired level of GDP growth along with strengthening the food

--- Page 22 ---
17

security and domestic economy. The private & foreign commercial banks will have to follow
the following rules to set agricultural and rural credit disbursement target and to achieve the
same:
a) Banks will set up a rational target for disbursing agricultural and rural credit of each
fiscal year considering the demand of agricultural and rural credit at field level,
bank‟s ability and efficiency of disbursing loan in this sector, total amount of loan and
advance of the bank and the target and achievement of the previous fiscal year of the
bank in this sector. But this target will not be less than 2.5% of the total amount of
loans and advance on 31 March of the previous fiscal year.
b) Every bank will monitor and discuss their relative advancement in achieving target on
quarterly basis. If the target of disbursement of any quarter is not achieved then that
un-achieved target must be achieved in the next quarter.
c) If any bank fails to achieve the target then that bank will have to deposit the fund with
BB equal to the unachievable part of the target. But whatever may be the target, if the
bank disburses agricultural and rural credit 2% or more of the total amount of loans
and advance on 31 March of the preceding year, this corrective provision will not be
applicable to that bank.
d) Bangladesh Bank will provide interest at bank rate (now 5%) to that bank which had
to deposit their fund in the above way.
e) The statements submitted by the bank would be examined by Bangladesh Bank in
case of taking a corrective provision in the above way.
f) The above regulation may be loosened in case of having a different regulation of
Bangladesh Bank about disbursement of loans and advance of the concern bank(s).

6.03.1 Allocation of Fund for Crop Loan
Banks shall disburse at least 60% of their total target under the agricultural and rural credit
programme for the FY 2014-15 as crop loan.
6.04. Credit for Fisheries sector Development
6.04.1. Credit for Fish Cultivation
At present, fisheries are considered as a profitable sector. It is essential to expand cultivation
of shrimp and fish for economic development of the country vis-à-vis satisfying the
deficiency of animal protein. Fisheries loan may also be extended for production of fish lings,
cultivation of endangered local varieties (Koi, Magur, Shing), Ruhi, Katla, Mrigel and
Monosex Telapia. To provide institutional finance in the fisheries sector with a view to
increasing export earnings, banks/financial institutions shall themselves evaluate the
potentials of fish cultivation and develop credit norms specifying the amount of loan, tenure,
disbursement period and repayment schedule etc. in the light of the Fisheries Policy of the
government. In this regard banks/MFIs may consult with local officials of Fisheries
Directorate, if needed. In case of fish cultivation in leased pond credit may be disbursed for
fish cultivation taking lease deed/value into consideration instead of mortgaging the pond.

--- Page 23 ---
18

6.04.2. Credit for Purchasing Fishing Equipments by the Fishermen in Coastal Belts
Banks/financial institutions shall take effective measures to provide short/long term finance
to the fishermen residing at the coastal belts permanently at easier terms and conditions for
purchasing/collecting fishing trawler, boat, net and other equipments. Besides, people
engaged in small businesses, particularly those who are engaged in fishing, fish cultivation
and production of dry fish may be provided with capital as per their requirement. If
necessary, the coastal fishermen may be allowed credit facilities on group basis.
6.04.3. Credit for Fish Cultivation in Water Reservoir/Jalmohal/Haor
Banks/financial institutions may allow credit facilities to the fishermen of water reservoir/
jalmohal/haor areas on group basis for fish cultivation. In view of the importance given by
the government on fisheries, banks shall take necessary steps to increase the supply of credit
for fisheries and inform people through publicity about the available credit facility. Banks
shall disburse fisheries loan developing suitable products for the fishermen so that they can
become self sufficient through availing the loan.
6.04.4. Credit for Fish Cultivation in Cage

The fish cultivation in cage got popularity in recent time in our country due to technical
excellencies. Fish cultivation in cage is the technology of cultivation of fish commercially in
high dense in suitable cages of different sizes under a controlled environment in various types
of water body. Recently, fish cultivation in cage in the river of Dakatia in Chandpur district
following Thai technology has attracted people‟s attention. There is a huge potentiality of fish
cultivation in cage in Kishoregonj, Netrokona, Shunamgonj and Cholonbil in Natore.
Banks may extend credit facility in “fish cultivation in cage” program as a sub-sector of fish.
Banks will take decision themselves about the amount, time, period, disbursement, repayment
and collateral of the loan with the help of officers of fisheries department and the local
farmers.
6.04.5. Credit for Aquaculture in Coastal Areas
The costal fish cultivation is still now limited to only shrimp cultivation. But it is possible to
earn more foreign currency by exporting potential fisheries under aquaculture in coastal areas
in Bangladesh. The potentiality of crab cultivation, crab fattening, cultivation of other white
fish like “vetki” and “bata” can be employed in this situation. To do this the costal people
need to get proper training and timely credit facility. The poor people of coastal region need
proper training and working capital for this regard.
Local banks will take decision themselves about the amount, time, period, disbursement,
repayment and collateral of the loan with the help of officers of fisheries department and the
local fish cultivators.

--- Page 24 ---
19

6.05. Credit for Animal Resources Development
The animal resources play an important role in the national economy of Bangladesh. But at
present, the supply of meat and milk is inadequate compared to the demand. In order to
implement and achieve the objectives of the Animal Resources Policy of the Government for
the development of animal resources, the banks/financial Institutions shall have to make
necessary arrangement for financing the existing sector/sub-sectors of animal resources as
under:
6.05.1. Cattle
a) Necessary arrangement shall be made to provide necessary credit facilities for purchasing
bullocks for plough, establishing dairy and goat/sheep farms, beef fattening, etc.
b) Rearing of buffalo along with the cows is also profitable. Buffalo is also a source of meat
and milk like cows. Besides, buffalo has important role in plough and rural transport.
Therefore, credit facilities may be extended for buffalo rearing for environmental and
traditional reason in areas where it is profitable including the char areas.
c) Bank may arrange to visit the dairy/cattle farm by its own trained officer or by a veterinary
doctor. According to their report bank branch may advice to the customer to take necessary
actions on urgent basis.
Banks/financial institutions shall develop credit norms specifying the amount of loan, tenure
and repayment schedule etc. themselves or in consultation with the officials of local
Livestock Department for financing the above sector.
6.05.2. Poultry Sector
Poultry sector is playing a vital role to meet the shortage of protein of the country through
supplying eggs and meat. Mean-while, the sector has established its strong position and it is
also playing an important role in the national economy of Bangladesh by creation of
employment through its forward and backward linkages. But still now, the supply of meat
and egg is inadequate compared to the requirement of the country. In order to implement and
achieve the objectives of the Animal Resource Policy of the Government through the
development of poultry sector, banks/financial institutions shall have to make necessary
arrangement for financing the existing sector/sub-sectors of animal resources as under:
Necessary arrangement may be made to provide credit facilities for establishing poultry
farm and purchasing of poultry feed, medicine/vaccine etc. Banks may take initiative to
disburse loan in poultry sector throughout the country without concentrating some
specific region.
b) Credit facilities may be extended for duck rearing in suitable areas including marshes
and haors of Bangladesh where it is profitable at family level due to environmental and
traditional reasons.
c) Bio-gas and electricity could be produced from poultry dropping.

--- Page 25 ---
20

Banks/financial institutions shall develop credit norms specifying the amount of loan, tenure
and repayment schedule etc. themselves or in consultation with the officials of local
Livestock Department for financing the above sector.
6.06. Credit for Agricultural and Irrigation Equipments
In various parts of the country, cultivation is hampering due to insufficiency of water and
shortage of bullock for plough. In order to address the issue and ensure timely crop
cultivation through reduction of dependency on natural sources of water and for
mechanization of agriculture, banks/financial institutions shall extend credit facilities for
procuring deep/shallow/hand tubewell, treadle pump etc.
To increase crop production through scientific cultivation process, supply of necessary credit
to farmer level for procuring of agricultural equipments such as, tractor, power tiller, BARI
seeder (seedling machine), BARI weeder (Wedding machine), Automatic seedling nursery
machine etc. will have to ensure. Besides, banks may finance the companies engaged in
production of USG fertilizer producing machine to prevent wastage of fertilizer, reduction of
production cost vis-a-vis increasing production and if necessary, banks may consult with the
officials of the Agriculture Extension Department.
It may be mentioned here that, among irrigation and agricultural machineries loan disbursed
at user level, will be treated as agricultural loan only.
6.06.1. Credit for Purchasing Harvester
Sometimes the farmers suffer losses because of delay in harvesting due to natural calamity or
any other reason. A harvester may be very helpful for the farmer to address the issue.
Bangladesh Rice Research Institute has invented some machine such as power thresher,
power winnower and dryer etc.). So it is necessary to disburse credit for harvester. Therefore,
to protect the interest of the farmers, every bank shall take initiatives to disburse loan for
purchasing harvester.
6.06.2. Credit for Purchasing Solar Energy Driven Irrigation Pump
Irrigation pumps are usually run by electricity. Diesel is used in areas where electricity is not
available. It is, however, possible to irrigate using the solar power. Irrigation is usually
necessary in the dry season, when the sun is very hot and the crop fields become dry. At that
time solar pumps may be used for irrigation. During the rainy season or cloudy weather there
is hardly any need of irrigation. The life span of a solar pump is about 20 years, it is therefore
cost effective in real terms although the initial expenditure is a bit high. Banks may allow
long term loans for purchasing solar energy driven pumps for irrigation.
6.07. Green Financing in Agricultural Sector:
6.07.1. Credit for Integrated Cow rearing (including beef fattening) and Bio-gas Plant
Small dairy farm of 4 (four) cows and one bio-digester is very effective in the context of the
rural family environment of Bangladesh and may be considered as a commercially profitable

--- Page 26 ---
21

model. This may result in self-employment in rural areas side by side employment of many
poor men and women. Almost 17 litres of milk (for rearing cow), 100 kg organic fertilizer
and 100 cubic feet bio-gas may be produced from such a model farm every day. In order to
make this model (cow rearing and beef fattening) popular, banks/financial institutions may
disburse credit to this sector as per their own credit norms and analyzing the risk.
Refinance scheme will be applicable against bank finance for establishment of bio-gas plant
to produce and use bio-gas in both rural and urban areas. This facility will also be applicable
for existing dairy farms/bio-gas plants.
6.07.2. Solar Energy
Refinance facility under the refinance scheme will be available for electricity production by
setting up solar panel in rural/urban areas at single, apartment, business organization and
cooperative levels. The following sub-sectors will be considered under this scheme:
a) Solar home system
b) Solar mini grid
c) Solar irrigation pumping system
d) Solar photo-voltaic accumulation plant
But only credit for solar home system and solar irrigation pumping system will be considered
as the agricultural credit.
6.07.3. Credit for Vermicompost Production
The increasing population growth, environmental pollution, lack of proper planning and
mechanization in agriculture, reckless use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides etc. have been
making our agricultural sector very much vulnerable day by day. Though the use of chemical
fertilizer increases the agricultural production temporarily but the fertility of the land
decreases gradually. It may create a great danger for future days. To get rid of this danger our
agriculturists and scientists have been giving importance in the more and more use of organic
fertilizer. Vermicompost can be a very good, cheap and available alternative for the chemical
fertilizer. Vermicompost is an organic fertilizer which can increase the agricultural
production as well as it helps in retaining the fertility of the land. If an earthworm is cultured
in a mixture of decomposable plants and cow dung it eats this mixture. After digestion it
excrete casts- dark, odorless, nutrient and organically nitrogen rich mud granules which is
known as “Vermicompost”. To make vermicompost production popularize, banks should
finance in this sector according to Annexure-C. Refinance scheme facility will be applicable
against banks finance to promote commercial vermicompost production.
6.07.4. Special fund of ADB for environment friendly brick kiln
A refinance scheme has been developed in Bangladesh Bank with financial assistance of
ADB for establishment of environment friendly brick kiln through improving the efficiency
of existing kiln of brickfield in Bangladesh by proper utilization of fuel and decreasing of
carbon emission. ADB‟s financial assistance in this fund is 50 million dollar or equivalent
Bangladeshi Taka. Improvement/conversion of fixed chimney kiln to improved zigzag kiln

--- Page 27 ---
22

and establishment of vertical shaft Brick kiln (VSBK), Hybrid Hoffman kiln (HHK) and
Tunnel Kiln will be financed under this project.
All information related to Green Finance under Agricultural & Rural Credit Policy and
Programme should be sent regularly to the Agricultural Credit and Financial Inclusion
Department. The Green Banking & CSR department of Bangladesh Bank is now operating
these schemes related to green finance.
6.08. Credit to the real farmers for crop warehousing and marketing:
Sometimes farmers are deprived to get fair price of their products due to fall in market price
during harvesting period. As a result, the intermediaries get benefitted from it. To avoid the
situation, Banks will have to extend credit facilities to farmers' level (Generally for maximum
5 acres and 2.5 acres for potato) against warehousing of agricultural goods for ensuring fair
price, so that the farmers can sell their product in their desired time.
If unused/abandoned/renovated (if needed, renovated by DACC) Govt./Govt. organization
owned warehouses are used in crop warehousing, credit may be provided in this
„warehousing and marketing‟ sector against crops/agricultural products stored in that
warehouse(s).
6.09. Finance in High Value Crops (HVCs)
Crops such as fruits, varieties of flowers, ornamental and herbal plants and trees, spices etc.
are usually termed as High Value Crops (HVCs). According to the ADB‟s definition- HVCs,
having better market prospects and are more profitable than the traditional food grains
particularly „boro‟ paddy of winter season. Generally, HVCs includes different fruits,
flowers, medicinal plants, ornamental plants, pulses, oil-seeds, spices etc. Banks shall make
adequate allocation to finance HVCs and accordingly disburse the same.
Various vegetables (corolla, brinjal, gourd, cabbage, carrot, cauliflower, borboti, bean, pea,
ladies finger, potol, potato, pumpkin, tomato), fruits (banana, guava, boroi, litchis, mango,
papaya, watermelon, Burmese grape „lotkon‟, Lemon, Hog-plum, Sapota, Malta, baukul,
strawberry, orange) and spices (pepper, garlic, ginger, onion, turmeric), oil seeds (hybrid
sunflower, peanut and oil plum) and polao (aromatic) rice, hybrid maize, „mug dal‟ etc. are
considered as High Value Crops.
6.10. Credit for Tissue Culture
It is possible to produce quality seeds/seedlings of some fruit plants along with potato,
strawberry and sugarcane in a lower cost in the country using tissue culture technology.
Although the tissue culture technology is capital intensive, farmers may be benefited from its
quality seeds/seedlings at fair price. Banks may finance the tissue culture sector under
agriculture credit subject to credit risk analysis.
6.11. Credit for Jute Cultivation
Jute cultivation is the golden heritage of Bangladesh. Recently, genome sequencing of jute
has been discovered; this discovery uncovered the quality of jute seed, production of fiber,

--- Page 28 ---
23

immunity and growth rate. It will play a revolutionary role on cultivation of jute.
Consequently, the scientists are expecting to be able to invent new varieties of jute which will
make possible to rotten in less quantity of water, to prevent diseases and weeds, to make salt
resistant jute varieties, produce better quality fiber. Being the climate and environment of
Bangladesh is friendly for jute cultivation Bangladeshi jute has a huge demand in
international market. The possibilities of new hope and potentiality in jute cultivation should
be taken into action successfully. Therefore, banks may, allow loans in jute cultivation sector
at easier terms in jute cultivable areas in Bangladesh.
6.12. Credit for Oil Palm Cultivation
Oil palm has a huge potentiality to come at light as the liquid gold of Bangladesh. Oil palm
cultivation can play a special role in mitigating the demand of imported edible oil and in
saving the foreign currency reserve. 27 agro-ecological zones including hill tracts in
Bangladesh are very suitable for oil palm cultivation. Though the cultivation of oil palm has
been started in a limited range in some areas in Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi and Sylhet
division, but it is not going commercially yet. The matured fruits can be available after 3.5 to
4 years of planting. If cultivated commercially, fruits can be available for about 35 years. At
present the palm oil is extracted manually in Bangladesh which is not commercially
profitable. But automatic extracting using crusher machine is very profitable. If, the oil palm
cultivation can be spreader throughout the country in a planned way and the produced oil
palm seeds can be processed using modern technology then we can mitigate the demand of
imported edible oil and we can save the foreign currency reserve. It also creates some
employment opportunity also.
Bank loan facilities are necessary for successful commercial oil palm cultivation. Farmers
will be interested in oil palm cultivation commercially if they get credit facilities from banks.
So banks can disburse medium/long term loan to the interested farmers according to the
agricultural credit policy and norms.
6.13. Credit for Establishment of Nursery
To maintain ecological balance by controlling the desertification process in the country, the
government's large scale Tree Plantation Programme and Rural & Social forestation
Programme have created high demand for seedlings. Banks/financial institutions shall extend
necessary credit facilities for establishment of nursery in the private sector on commercial
basis to meet the high demand for seedlings. Credit may also be extended for cultivation of
flowers, fruits and their seeds, ornamental trees, cactus, orchid, etc. on commercial basis.
Banks/financial institutions shall develop credit norms specifying the amount of loan, tenure,
and repayment schedule, etc. in consultation with the officials of Forest Department for
financing in this sector.

--- Page 29 ---
24

6.14. Special/Priority Sectors
6.14.1. Credit Disbursement at Concessional Interest Rate for Specified Crops
There is a large demand for pulses, oil seeds, spices and maize in the country. But the
production of these crops is not sufficient. As a result, we have to spend huge amount of
foreign currency for importing them. In order to encourage on production of such crops and
disburse loan to this sector by the state owned commercial and specialized banks and also the
private and foreign commercial banks the concessional interest rate of credit disbursed in the
cultivation of pulses, oil seeds, spices and maize at farmers level has been set at 4% from 01
July, FY 2010-2011 under interest-loss subsidy facilities of the Government.
Along with the state owned commercial and specialized banks, the private and foreign
commercial banks may also disburse loan against their annual agricultural and rural credit
target in pulse, oil seed, spices and maize cultivation under the government‟s facility of 6%
interest subsidy. In that case, if bank incurred any loss after getting the 6% subsidy from the
government as the interest loss then that amount of loss will be considered as the CSR
activities of that bank.
For implementation of agricultural and rural credit program under the government facility of
4% concessional interest rate for pulse, oil seed, spices and maize cultivation the following
policies should be followed:
Loan Disbursement and Recovery
1. 4% concessional interest rate facility will be applicable for the following crops:
a. Pulses: „Mug‟ bean, Lentil, Blackgram, Chickpea, „Aurohor‟, Grass pea, and Cow
pea.
b. Oil seed: Mustard, Groundnut, Sunflower, Sesame, Linseed and Soybean.
c. Spices: Ginger, garlic, onion, pepper, turmeric, coriander and cumin.
d. Maize.
2. Following rules should be followed in disbursing and recovering the above loan:
a. Credit norms in agricultural and rural credit policy and program must be
applicable in determining maximum and minimum credit limit on the basis of per
acre production cost, loan disbursement season etc.
b. Every bank should fix up a target of disbursement on the basis of actual demand at
the beginning of the year and banks will monitor its branches to ensure the
disbursement and recovery of loan.
c. Other policies for agricultural credit announced by Bangladesh Bank such as:
maximum limit per farmer, collateral, receiving of application form and its
processing time, eligibility of borrower, use of passbook, loan disbursement,
proper use of loan, monitoring and recovery etc. will also be applicable in case of
these crops.

--- Page 30 ---
25

Subsidy against loan disbursement at concessional rate:
1. Banks will apply to Bangladesh Bank to get 6% interest subsidy against their
recovered/adjusted loan account at 4% concessional rate within 1 month of
completion of that fiscal year. Banks will enclose a statement containing detail
information such as: total number of borrower, date of loan sanction, date of loan
disbursement, total amount of disbursed loan, total interest loss of bank etc.
Bangladesh Bank will give the subsidy after verification within 1 month of getting the
application from the bank.
2. Bangladesh Bank will check minimum 10% of total eligible claimed loan by onsite
inspection on a random basis. The actual subsidy will be determined by deducting the
percentage of ineligible loan disbursement from the total claimed subsidy. Bangladesh
Bank will provide subsidy to the banks from its own fund. Later, Bangladesh Bank
will send the statements of paid amount to the Ministry of Finance and government
will reimburse the same amount to Bangladesh Bank.
3. The branches should file all the list of borrowers containing detail information such
as: total number of borrower, name and address of borrowers, date of loan sanction,
date of loan disbursement, date of adjustment, total amount of disbursed loan, total
interest loss of bank etc. so that the branch can show it if needed by Bangladesh Bank
before reimbursement of interest-loss subsidy. Besides, branches will send all the data
as a statement to their Head Office.
4. Banks should take all necessary steps including fruitful monitoring so that the real
farmer can utilize the loan for the specific crop.
5. The interest loss of disbursed loan will be determined by adding 6 months grace
period with the loan period determined at the time of disbursement. If there remains
any loan/part of loan un-recovered then the concessional interest rate will not be
applicable in those loan/loans. Bank‟s normal interest rate will be applicable from the
disbursement date in case of classified loan.
6. Monitoring will be strengthened to recover loan under this system.
7. Banks will deliver the list of borrower who took loan 4% concessional rate to the
local Agricultural Extension Officer/ Sub-Assistant Agricultural Extension Officer. If
any recommendation comes from Agricultural Extension Officer/ Sub-Assistant
Agricultural Extension Officer about the misuse of any agricultural loan at 4%
concessional rate, then bank‟s normal interest rate will be applicable instead of 4%
concessional rate in that loan.
8. A farmer taking another loan but not classified yet can be given loan at 4%
concessional rate for pulse, oilseed, spices and maize cultivation.
9. 4% interest rate facility at farmer‟s level should also be ensured in case of loan
disbursement with MFIs linkage.

--- Page 31 ---
26

6.14.2. Credit for Salt cultivation at concessional interest rate
There is a large demand of salt for household consumption and industrial use in Bangladesh.
The coastal area is suitable for salt cultivation. A large number of small, marginal farmers
and sharecroppers of the coastal area are involved in salt cultivation. But they become
victims of frequent cyclone and tidal wave; as a result their financial condition remains weak.
Therefore, it is necessary to provide them agricultural credit at easy terms and lower rate of
interest for salt cultivation. The bank branches at coastal areas shall extend credit facilities to
the farmers for cultivation of salt under area approach method.
The genuine salt cultivators per person shall be allowed loan for cultivating salt from 0.5
bigas to 2.5 acres of land individually or on a group basis at a concessional interest rate of
4%. But there is a condition that the loan should be repaid within the last day of repayment
schedule.
Meanwhile a credit norm has been established and issued (ACD Circular no- 01/2011) about
the maximum limit of loan per acre for salt cultivation taking into account the rent/lease of
land, cost of polythene and embankment etc. However, the farmers cultivating salt in their
own land shall not be entitled to rent/lease component. But concern banks may apply their
own credit norms and policies regarding limit of loan per acre depending on the local
conditions.
6.14.3. Credit for Betel Leaf Cultivation
Many people are engaged in betel leaf cultivation due to its profitability. Betel leaf
production is helping in earning foreign remittance after fulfilling the national demand.
Normally, farmers in our country cultivate betel leaf in „Baroj‟. The indigenous people of
Sylhet area cultivate betel leaf through host tree method. Betel leaf is also cultivated in large
scale in Barishal, Khulna, Rajshahi and Chittagong regions. The existing credit norms should
be followed in disbursing loan for betel leaf cultivation. Credit should be provided for „baroj‟
farmers along with the farmers cultivating betel leaf through natural methods on
individual/group basis.
6.14.4. Credit for Apiculture
Honey is a fabulous gift of nature. Honey is delicious and tasty. It has huge demand in the
market. It also has demand due to its medicinal use. Bee cultivation in boxes alongside
crop/fruit/flower cultivation is a profitable sector. Necessary credit facilities shall be allowed
to areas known for apiculture/honey production following concern credit norms (Annexure-E,
serial no-110). Credit facilities shall be extended to small cultivators of bee and producers of
honey individually or on a group basis. In case of crediting to a single farmer personal
guarantee from an acceptable third party is needed and in case of group based crediting group
guarantee and as well as personal guarantee from a third party, when necessary, is required.
Overall, bank may disburse loan on the basis of banker-customer relationship.

--- Page 32 ---
27

6.14.5. Credit for Less Developed and Neglected Areas on Priority Basis
One of the main objectives of the Agricultural and Rural Credit Policy is to create self-
employment and reduce poverty through financing the income generating activities and
poverty alleviating programme alongside providing credit to the small and marginal farmers
including sharecroppers. In order to achieve this objective, priorities shall be given to less
developed and neglected areas (e.g. char, haor, coastal areas etc.) for extending agricultural
and rural credit. The interest rate may be charged a bit lower for the farmers of less developed
and neglected areas.
6.14.6. Financing Marginal, Small and Sharecroppers
Landless farmers (owner of land less than 0.494 acres), small and marginal farmers (owner of
land more than 0.494 acres but less than 2.47 acres) and the sharecroppers (the farmers who
cultivate land of others and their ownership of land is maximum 1 acre) shall be given
priority for disbursing credit. The sharecroppers directly involved in agricultural production
will be eligible to have credit under this policy. In this case, the sharecropper should have the
National ID Card. Farmer residing permanently in the areas under the financing bank branch
may avail credit submitting a certificate given by the owner of the concerned land. The
„Agricultural Inputs Assistance Card‟ issued by the Agriculture Extension Department will
also be applicable in this regard. No separate document will be necessary to identify the
farmers who have recently opened account with the initial deposit of Tk. 10/- or who have
„Agricultural Inputs Assistance Card‟. If the certificate from the owner of land is not
available banks may provide credit to the sharecroppers against a certificate given by the
local responsible and respectable person. Certificate given by the Chairman of the respective
Union Parishad or Headmaster/Principal of the local school/college or person acceptable to
the bank for identifying the applicant may be accepted to identify the farmers who have
National ID Card but do not have the „Agricultural Inputs Assistance Card‟.
Having identified the real sharecroppers, credit shall be disbursed following crop credit
norms. Credit amount will be determined including the rent of land if sharecroppers cultivate
the land on rent basis. A Pass Book may be issued to the sharecropper under the usual policy
of the financing Bank. The agricultural credit shall be disbursed individually or on a group
basis in order to ensure bank credit facility to small, marginal farmers and sharecroppers.
If a sharecropper cultivates lands of the same owner for three consecutive years, the
„Revolving Crop Credit Limit‟ system will be applicable to him. The branch manager will
ensure close monitoring so that no non-farmers can avail of loan in the disguise of
sharecroppers.
6.14.7. Credit for Successful Farmers
Special initiatives shall be taken to extend necessary finance to the successful farmers. This
initiative will have a demonstration effect on the other farmers, and they will be encouraged
to invest in similar initiatives. The list of successful farmers collected through Agriculture

--- Page 33 ---
28

Extension Department under the Ministry of Agriculture will be sent to various banks.
However, it may so happen that names of many successful farmers may not be in the list and
some farmers may have recently come out successful. Therefore, banks shall extend
necessary credit facilities even to those successful farmers who are not included in the list.
6.14.8. Credit for Mushroom Cultivation
It is necessary to encourage small scale mushroom cultivation in view of demand, nutrition
and its feasibility for cultivation in the environment of Bangladesh and to alleviate the
unemployment of the country. Credit facilities from the banks are necessary to be successful
in mushroom cultivation commercially. Priority shall be given to the entrepreneurs trained by
the National Mushroom Development and Extension Centre or Agriculture Extension
Department. Banks can facilitate credit to the farmers who are interested in mushroom
cultivation according to the credit norms.
6.14.9. Credit for Silk Industry
In order to increase the production of silk cloth and to expand the cultivation of silk worm,
banks/financial institutions will take necessary measures to disburse credit for silk worm
production/ Mulberry(tunt) tree cultivation in Rajshahi and other regions where there is a
prospect of its cultivation. The amount of credit, its term and repayment schedule may be
determined by discussing with the silk cultivation extension authority. Besides, banks can
disburse loan for commercial silk production according to the enclosed credit norms.
6.14.10. Credit for Cotton Cultivation
Cotton is a cash crop. It is the essential raw material for textile sector. A huge amount of
foreign currency is to be spent for cotton import to meet the huge demand. Since almost all
the amount of the total demand of raw cotton is imported from some limited countries, it
became a great threat for our textile industry. In this situation to prevent our textile industry
from possible threat may be caused in future by the conservative policy initiatives of the
cotton exporting countries, we have to give emphasis in cotton cultivation. So banks have to
take necessary action to disburse loan in this sector. For this purpose, banks themselves shall
take effective steps to provide necessary credit facilities in this sector in consultation with the
officials of local Cotton Development Department.
6.14.11. Rural Finance:
Apart from agricultural credit, banks/institutions will finance to various self-employment and
income generating agricultural/non-agricultural activities to improve the socio-economic
conditions of the rural people through stimulating the rural economy. Necessary capital may
be provided for running small business particularly small and cottage industry such as-
bamboo & cane product, rice husking, puffed rice (Muri)/flattened rice (Chirwa) production,
pottery and blacksmith, boat purchasing, bee rearing/apiculture and honey cultivation, sewing
machine/tailoring, production of imitation ornament, candle, wood work, grocery shops and
for employment generation for physically handicapped people and poor women.

--- Page 34 ---
29

6.14.12. Credit for Weaving Industry
Bangladesh Krishi Bank and Rajshahi Krishi Unnayan Bank allow finance to the weavers
fixing separate targets under the annual Agricultural and Rural Credit Target. Similarly, the
other state-owned and private banks may also extend credit facilities to rural weavers
alongside the agricultural credit.
6.14.13. Credit for Women Associated with Income Generating Agriculture and
Agriculture Allied Activities
Half of the populations of Bangladesh are women. Due to this population distribution, the
effective and meaningful participation of women in the main stream economy is essential for
sustainable economic growth.
They should be turned into human resources through involving themselves with agriculture
and agriculture-allied income generating activities. The poor women of the rural areas shall
be encouraged through providing them credit facilities for crop production, running agro-
processing and agriculture related small business so that they can change their economic
conditions. Credit facilities may also be extended to women for agricultural activities such as
gardening, nursery, post harvesting activities, production and preservation of seeds, bee
rearing/apiculture and honey production, food processing, fisheries, animal resources sector,
etc.
6.14.14. Credit for Physically Handicapped People
Banks/financial institutions shall extend credit facilities to the physically handicapped people
against various agricultural/non-agricultural self-employed income generating activities to
consider their nature of disability so that they can lead a meaningful, fruitful and contributory
life with dignity. Banks may ease the conditions of crediting in case of the physically
handicapped people. The physically handicapped people may be allowed credit facilities in
the sectors suitable to them including production of bamboo and cane product, rice husking,
nursery, bee rearing/apiculture and honey production, small grocery shop, etc.
7.0. Special Credit Programmes in Supporting of Agricultural and Rural Development
7.01. Special Credit Programme of Bangladesh Bank for Sharecroppers
A special credit scheme was initiated in the fiscal year 2009-10 to provide credit facilities in
timely, harassment free, collateral free and at low interest rate through BRAC to the
sharecroppers who have been so long remained outside the orbit of Bank credit. This program
has been running from FY 2009-2010 with a revolving fund of 500 crore taka under the
refinance scheme of Bangladesh Bank. In this arrangement, 3 (thee) lakh sharecroppers from
172 Upazillas under 37 districts are supposed to get crop loan and loan for purchasing
agricultural equipments only at 10% interest. The farmers are really benefited getting first
time collateral‟s free and lower interest rate credit facility under this scheme and it has a
positive impact on their livelihood. This refinance scheme is extended for more three years
from July 2012 to June 2015 due to its important role in poverty alleviation. Again, a new
interest rate of 18% (reducing method) at sharecropper level was set. In this phase, 5 (five)

--- Page 35 ---
30

lakh sharecroppers from 250 Upazillas under 48 districts will be supposed to get crop loan
and loan for purchasing agricultural equipments. About 9 (Nine) lakh sharecroppers from 250
Upazillas under 48 districts got about more than Taka 1412 Crore (One Thousand Four
Hundreds and Twelve Crore) for crop loan and loan for purchasing agricultural inputs in a
period from the beginning to 30 June 2013.
8.0. Special Credit Programmes in Supporting of Agricultural and Rural Development
financed by ADB
8.01. North-West Crop Diversification Project (NCDP)
The North-west region is one of the poorest regions of Bangladesh. The majority of the
farmers of this region produce only rice which the market price is comparatively low. The
North-western Crop Diversification Project (NCDP) financed by Asian Development Bank
was undertaken to alleviate poverty from the fertile north-western part of Bangladesh through
farming High Value Crops (described in section 6.09) instead of traditional farming ended in
30 June 2009. High value crops are producing in a land area of 1,53,000 hector under this
project in spite of a primary target of 40,000 hector. At present almost 2 lakh 40 thousands
farmers are getting credit under this project in spite of a target of 1 lakh 60 thousands. In line
with the above project, loan is being disbursed to 1.86 lac farmers (60% of them are women)
each of them owning 0.2 to 1.2 hectors of land in 61 Upazillas under 16 districts of Rajshahi
and Rangpur Division from a revolving fund of Tk 174 crore through wholesaling by
Rajshahi Krishi Unnayan Bank and being retailed by 4 Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs)
(BRAC, Proshika, RDRS and GKF) under the responsibility and management of Bangladesh
Bank.
8.02 Second Crop Diversification Project (SCDP)
Considering the success of the North-western Crops Diversification Project (NCDP), the
Government of Bangladesh has undertaken a project named „Second Crop Diversification
Project‟ (SCDP) to be financed by the Asian Development Bank. The project is to be
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Government of Bangladesh, while Bangladesh
Bank will act as the implementing agency of the credit component of the project. Apart from
Rajshahi and Rangpur Division, credit facilities will be extended in 52 Upazillas of 27
districts under Khulna, Barisal and Dhaka Divisions. A total of 2,03,000 farmers will be
received this credit facilities. Authority of wholesaling is given to Basic Bank Ltd. and
Eastern Bank Ltd. for implementation of credit component of this project. Besides,
experienced MFI BRAC is selected for disbursing micro credit to the farmers at the field
level.
Under this project, like NCDP, credit facilities will be provided for cultivation of High Value
Crops (described in section 6.09) and plantation of high value trees. The credit component of
the project is US$ 26 million equivalent to Tk. 203 crore approximately. The credit facilities
under this project already been started. The two wholesale banks under this project are given
a credit of 143 crore taka from Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 36 ---
31

9.0. Interest Rate of Agricultural Loan
The banks will fix themselves the sector/sub-sector wise rate of interest for agricultural and
rural credit. But, the maximum limit of interest rate set by the Bangladesh Bank will be
applicable for agricultural sector as usual. It is notable that, the maximum limit of interest
rate is 13% under Agricultural and Rural Credit Policy and Programme. The interest of
Agricultural loan will have to impose on yearly basis or term basis (for those loans which
duration is not over 12 month). Concerned banks should inform Bangladesh Bank about the
sector/sub-sector wise rate of interest at borrower level immediately.
10.0. Use of Information Technology in Agricultural Credit Management
The use of information technology may play a positive role in improving the standard of
living of all spheres of people. As far as possible, the banks shall take initiatives to preserve
the mobile phone number of the borrowers at branch level. The mobile phone number of
relatives/neighbors may also be preserved, in the case the borrowers who do not have any
mobile phone. But the farmers shall not be deprived of credit facilities on such ground that
the applicant does not have any mobile phone. The bank branches/higher authorities of the
concerned bank shall make phone calls to the farmers to know about the loan disbursement
and recovery. Bangladesh Bank will also make calls to farmers from time to time to know the
problems in loan disbursement and recovery.
Besides, the use of information technology including mobile phone and internet for
disbursement and recovery of agro-loan in the interest of the farmers will be supported in
principle.
11.0. Monitoring of Agricultural and Rural Credit
11.01. Monitoring at Bank Level
The participating banks shall ensure effective monitoring system so that only the real farmers
get agricultural credit timely according to the agricultural credit policy and norms without
any harassment and the disbursement as well as the recovery targets are achieved.
The main objectives of the agriculture and rural credit monitoring are as under:
Achievement of the overall agricultural and rural credit disbursement target;
b) Ensuring disbursement of 60% of the total agricultural credit in the crop sub-sector;
Emphasizing on the disbursement of credit to Fisheries and Animal Resources- the two
other main sub-sectors of agriculture;
d) Using area approach method for loan disbursement i.e. focusing the crop for the area it
suits the best;
Extending credit facilities to the neglected people of less developed areas including char,
haor, costal belts, etc;
Ensuring credit facilities to real farmers in a transparent way;
g) Ensuring proper utilization of loan towards recovery of the disbursed loan.

--- Page 37 ---
32

The Head Offices/Regional Offices of the participating banks shall evaluate regularly and
take necessary steps to ensure timely disbursement and proper utilization of the loans
sanctioned by the bank branch. The demand for and supply of credit at branch level shall be
monitored by the Head Offices/Regional Offices so that crop production is not hampered due
to short supply of credit under any circumstances. The Head Offices shall arrange
fortnightly/monthly evaluation of the overall agricultural credit disbursement and recovery
position and give necessary instructions to branches/regional offices and take corrective
measures from time to time.
11.02. Monitoring at Central Bank Level
In order to ensure more effective monitoring of the implementation of the Agricultural and
Rural Credit Policy undertaken in the interest of the real farmers of Bangladesh, largely
dependent on agriculture, a monitoring division at Head Office and monitoring units at
branches of Bangladesh Bank are in place.
The main features of agricultural credit monitoring section of Bangladesh Bank are as
follows:
 Conducting off-site monitoring by collecting monthly statements containing required
information of agricultural and rural credit disbursement and recovery from the
scheduled banks.
 On-site monitoring of agricultural and rural credit program of scheduled banks is also
conducted by the bank inspection department (DBI) of Bangladesh bank head office
and branch offices. Besides, Agricultural Credit and Financial Inclusion Department
also examine the proper uses of agricultural loan from time to time on sample basis.
 Monthly discussion meeting with the state-owned commercial banks and specialized
banks and bimonthly meeting with the private and foreign banks held regularly with a
view to discuss the progress of agricultural and rural credit program. Meeting also
held to discuss about progress of loan disbursement, barriers to achieve target,
transparency in loan disbursement, to ensure the qualitative value, loan recovery etc.
 Many private and foreign banks are disbursing agricultural and rural credit through
Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) due to limited branches in rural areas. In this case
banks are ordered to supervise the agricultural and rural credit program directly at the
borrower levels. Bangladesh Bank also conducting on site inspection on sample basis
after examining the report and statement submitted by the participating banks. The
accountability is ensured by the participation of state-owned banks as well as the
private banks or their nominated MFI representatives in the District Agricultural
Credit Committee. It is to be mentioned that Bangladesh Bank officials also attend
those meetings.
 Banks are strongly motivated to disburse loan publicly in presence of local elites with
a view to increase transparency in loan disbursement. In last three years there is a
large number of banks conducted this kind of publicly loan disbursement. Officials of

--- Page 38 ---
33

different levels of Bangladesh Bank head office and branch offices have been
attending these meetings.
 There grown a huge interest of cultivating some specific crops (pulse, oil seeds, spices
and maize) among the farmers due to massive publicity by Bangladesh Bank about
financing the cultivation of these crops at a concessional interest rate of 4%. At the
same time, the loan disbursement in this sector by different banks has been increasing
as a result of intensive monitoring by Bangladesh Bank.
 Bangladesh Bank collects cell phone numbers of borrowers from the banks to
communicate with farmers directly to know about the transparency, loan utilization,
bank‟s service etc. Honorable Governor communicates with farmers directly over
cell/phone. This type of monitoring using mobile phone will be continued.
 Bangladesh Bank takes necessary steps on receiving any written or telephonic
complaint concerning agricultural and rural credit.
11.03. Service from “Customers Interest Protection Center” in Bangladesh Bank
With a view to protect the customers from harassment in receiving service in banking and
financial sector including agricultural and rural credit and to settle any complaints in a
possible quickest time, Customer Interest Protection Center (CIPC) has been established in
Bangladesh Bank. Farmers can call directly from any phone on a hotline (no- 16236) to
complain their own. Bangladesh Bank will take necessary measures against their complaints.
Besides, the phone, mobile and fax number of the Customer Interest Protection Center
(CIPC) of branch offices of Bangladesh Bank are listed below for the welfare of public and
stakeholders.
Office
Phone
Mobile
Fax
Chittagong
031-616800
01557347089
031-634776
Khulna
041-732539
01755504561
041-725577
Rajshahi
0721-772871
01720464976
0721-775792
Sylhet
0821-725459
01755534297
0821-715687
Barishal
0431-2174505
01757436667
0431-64271
Bogra
051-51617
01710437479
051-51190
Rangpur
0521-61037
01755507547
0521-64829
Mymensingh
091-62025
01920456442
091-62065

11.04 Monitoring by District Agricultural Credit Committee
The District Agricultural Credit Committee has been playing an effective role in successful
implementation and coordination of the Agriculture/Rural Credit Program at field level under
'Lead Bank‟ system. Under this system, the State-owned Commercial or Specialized Bank
branches have been allotted with specified union(s) for disbursing agricultural loan. The
Deputy Commissioner of the district is the Chairman of the District Agricultural Credit
Committee and a specified bank holds the Secretarial responsibility as the 'Lead Bank' of the
district. The District Agricultural Credit Committee holds monthly meeting to discharge its
supervision and coordination functions related to agricultural and rural credit.

--- Page 39 ---
34

At present, disbursement of agricultural credit is compulsory for all private and foreign banks
operating in Bangladesh. Many private banks do not have branches in all districts as well as
rural areas. Due to inadequate no of branches in rural areas, the private and foreign banks are
disbursing agricultural and rural credit through their branches and/or with the partnership of
Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) approved by the Micro-credit Regulatory Authority
(MRA).
In view of the participation of all banks in rural credit operation and in order to make the
agricultural credit activities more effective and coordinated, the representation of private and
foreign banks in the District Agricultural Credit Committee alongside the State-owned
Commercial and Specialized Banks is essential.
Keeping the goals, objectives and the existing framework of the „Lead Bank‟ system
unchanged, the private and foreign banks shall be represented in the District Agricultural
Credit Committee as under:
Sl .
No.
Presence of Private
and Foreign Banks
in the District
Mode of Agricultural
and
Rural
Credit
Operation
in
the
District
Private and Foreign Banks to
be represented by in the
District
Agricultural
Credit
Committee
Banks
having
branches
in
the
concerned district.
Agricultural
and
rural
credit
are
disbursed
through own branches
only in the concerned
district.
Branch/Zone chief of the bank in
the district.
Agricultural
and
rural
credit
are
disbursed
through own branches as
well as in partnership
with MFIs under credit
wholesaling
Branch/Zone chief of the bank in
the district with own and MFI
partnership related information.
Agricultural
and
rural
credit
are
disbursed
through partnership with
MFIs
under
credit
wholesaling instead of
own branches.
Branch/Zone chief of the bank in
the district with MFI partnership
related information.
Banks
having
no
branches
in
the
concerned district.
Agriculture
and
Rural
Credit
are
disbursed
through partnership with
MFIs
under
credit
wholesaling
Local Coordinator of the MFIs
nominated by the concerned
Bank.

--- Page 40 ---
35

12.00. Agricultural and Rural Credit Recovery
12.01. Importance of Agriculture and Rural Credit Recovery
The concerned branch/regional officials themselves will fix the installment and timeline for
repayment of the loan in the light of the repayment schedule annexed herewith. At the
beginning of the harvesting season as well as at the marketing time, the bank branches shall
take all out effort for recovery of loan. It should be kept in mind that loan disbursement will
be hampered if loans are not recovered. Practice of credit waiving should be avoided as far as
possible; because credit waiving may make the borrowers reluctant to repay the loan in
future. However, loan recovery can be postponed/delayed in consultation with Bangladesh
Bank in case of natural calamities. In order to avoid financial loss and liquidity crisis due to
classification of loans and to ensure the best use of the fund, banks shall gear up recovery
activities.
12.02. Awareness related to Agricultural and Rural Credit Recovery
Publicity may be made highlighting the importance of agricultural loan recovery to raise
awareness among the concerned public.
12.03. Special Initiatives for Agricultural and Rural Credit Recovery
The following steps may be considered to expedite the agricultural and rural credit recovery:
a) The banks may award certificate/incentives under their own policy to encourage the
officials for recovery of loan.
b) Banks may allow rebate on interest rate as reward for the borrowers who repay the
loan in time.
c) Effective steps shall be taken to settle the long pending Certificate Cases. In this
regard, incentives may be arranged for repayment of outstanding loan at a time.
d) Initiatives may be taken to reschedule classified loans in consultation with
Bangladesh Bank.
e) To recover loans, a separate 'Recovery Cell' may be constituted at branches where the
amount of classified/overdue loan is more than 50% of the total loan portfolio.
f) Arranging 'Agricultural Credit Recovery Camp' at places of farmers gathering with
prior publicity to recover loan.
g) The use of information technology to recover agricultural credit may be encouraged.
13.0. Availability of Agricultural and Rural Credit Related Information
Banks shall display information regarding the products and facilities regarding agricultural
and rural credit at places easily noticeable for the visitors including their own website. In
order to bring more transparency in agriculture credit disbursement, information relating to
Agriculture credit disbursement shall be displayed/preserved in the notice board of the branch
and be updated regularly.
14.0. Addressing the Adverse Effects of Climate Change
The atmospheric temperature is rising gradually as a result of excessive emission of green
house gas including carbon dioxide in the industries and by destroying the forest and trees all

--- Page 41 ---
36

over the world. This global warming is the main reason of climate change. Bangladesh is
major among the countries mostly affected by climate change, mainly due to its geographical
location. Most of the countries of little altitude above sea level are in south-east Asia. Climate
change will increase not only sea level but also the frequency and intensity of natural
calamity in these countries known as “world‟s basket of rice”. Cyclone, flood, high tide and
salinity have been increasing due to rise of the sea level. Deviation in the usual course of
seasonal change is becoming visible due to change in climate. Flood and water clogging of
mid-region, sudden flood of north-east region, draught and salinity of north-west and south-
west region and the high tide of costal may create acute problem for the agriculture of
Bangladesh.
Since the recovery of agricultural credit becomes risky with the damage of crops, the banks
shall be conscious about the adverse impact of natural calamities vis-a-vis climate change and
encourage the farmers to take the following steps:
a) Bring a little change in the loan disbursement and recovery schedule from area to
area;
b) Cultivating salinity-tolerant crops in the salty areas;
c) Cultivating water- tolerant crops in the water-logged and flood-prone areas;
d) Cultivating draught- tolerant crops in the draught-prone areas;
e) Arrange for irrigation during dry season to avoid low production and loss of crops;
f) Encouraging use of surface water instead of underground water for irrigation;
g) Using organic fertilizer and insecticide by natural means instead of using chemical
fertilizer and pesticides;
h) Banks shall be conservative to provide agricultural credit for cultivating land
destroying forest or hills;
i) Credit facilities shall be continued for cultivating fruits, vegetables, social forestry,
livestock, duck, poultry and gardening at the home-stead normally in flood-free years.
j) To face the problems created by climate change we have to encourage the farmers to
practice the alternative and strategic farming such as: Cultivation of Mug dal just after
the paddy, cultivation of BARI Mug-5 in the season of Kharip-1 just after the Mustard
at the valley, cultivation of lentils with paddy as relay crop, encourage the farmers to
follow the prime method in cultivation of lentil in dry land.
A list of crops which is resistant to adverse effect of climate change is given below:
Sl.
No.
Crop
Mutational Ability Against Climate Change
BARI
Wheet-21
(Shotabdi)
Leaf spot disease tolerant, Leaf rot disease tolerant and
heat resistant
BARI Wheat -23 (Bijoy)
Leaf spot disease tolerant, Leaf rot disease tolerant and
heat resistant
BARI Wheat -25
Leaf spot disease tolerant, Leaf rot disease tolerant and
salinity resistant

--- Page 42 ---
37

BARI Wheat -26
Leaf spot disease tolerant, Leaf rot disease tolerant and
drought resistant
BARI Wheat Triticale-1
Draught and adverse weather resistant
BARI Berli-4
Salinity resistant and less disease-pest affected
Rai-5 (Mustard)
Draught resistant and minor salinity resistant
BARI Mustard-7
Resistant to Alterneria blight disease and temporary
water logging
BARI Mustard-8
Resistant to Alterneria blight disease and temporary
water logging
10.
BARI Mustard-11
This variety can be cultivated after harvesting of
Amon paddy. Draught and salinity resistant.
11.
BARI Mustard-16
Draught and salinity resistant. Also resistant to
Alterneria disease and Aerobangki parasite
12.
BARI Potato-1 (Hira)
Temperature resistant. Resist slightly the adverse
effect of climate change. Viral disease resistant.
13.
BARI Potato-22 (Soikot)
Suitable for salty area. Viral disease resistant.
14.
BARI Tomato-4
Resistant to high temperature
15.
BARI Tomato-6 (Choity)
Resistant to high temperature. Bacterial disease
resistant
16.
BARI
Tomato-10
(Onupoma)
Resistant to high temperature. Bacterial disease
resistant
17.
BARI Highbred Tomato-3
(Summer)
High temperature resistant summer highbred variety
18.
Jute Kenaf-3 ( Bot Kenaf)
and 4
Resistant to water logging
19.
Sugarcane-39
Resistant to draught, water logging, flood and salinity
20.
Sugarcane-40
Resistant to draught, water logging, flood and salinity
21.
BARI Groundnut-9
Short term and high yield variety
22.
BARI Mango-5
High yield and advance variety
23.
BARI Mango-6
High yield and seasonal variety
24.
BARI Mango-7
High yield and seasonal variety
25.
BARI Mango-8
High yield and „Late‟ variety
26.
BARI Bottle Gourd-3
Cultivable everywhere in Bangladesh
27.
BARI Bottle Gourd-4
Cultivable everywhere in Bangladesh
28.
BARI Rambutan
Cultivable everywhere in Bangladesh
In case of disbursement of the crops stated above which are not in the list of crops mentioned
in credit norms, banks may determine the norms of these crops on the basis of consultation

--- Page 43 ---
38

with concerned Agricultural specialist/Agricultural Extension Officer and Banker-customer
relationship.
15.0. Awareness and Training
At present disbursement of agricultural credit is compulsory for all banks. Participation of
private and foreign banks in agriculture and rural Credit programme is new. Besides, a
number of new items have been incorporated in the policy. As such, initiatives shall be taken
to make the bankers at various levels, including field level, awareness of the objectives,
priorities and provisions of the Agricultural and Rural Credit Policy. With this end, the banks
shall take necessary steps including training and workshop programme. The respective
department of Bangladesh Bank will provide necessary technical support.
16.0. Submission of Statements
The concerned banks/financing organizations shall submit statements related to agriculture
and rural credit correctly and timely on monthly basis as desired by Bangladesh Bank for
analyzing the implementation status of Annual Agriculture and Rural Credit Programme. Any
loan shown in SME sector cannot be shown in Agricultural credit sector at the same time to
avoid double-counting. Besides, periodic statements desired by Bangladesh Bank regarding
agriculture and rural credit have to be submitted expeditiously.
17.0. Incentives in case of success in Agricultural and Rural Credit Programme
Achieving the target in agricultural credit disbursement will be considered as the success of
the managing authority of the bank. So this achievement will be considered as the major
positive indicator for considering application of opening new branch, authorized dealer
branch and exchange company abroad. Besides, success in agricultural credit disbursement
will be considered also with other factors in case of CAMELS Rating by Bangladesh Bank.
Agricultural Financing Performance such as target achievement, loan disbursement in crop
sector, credit at 4% concessional rate, disbursement through own branches and recovery rate
will be considered as the indicators in rating point of Management Component of CAMELS
rating. Also Banks, efficient in agricultural credit programme will get preference also in case
of special liquidity support.
18.0. Banks‟ own Agricultural and Rural Credit Policy and Programme
In the light of the above policy and norms, every bank shall develop a detailed Agriculture
and Rural Credit Programme of their own for the FY 2014-15 considering the total
agriculture/rural credit target set by the bank and issue necessary instructions for
implementation of the same by its branches.
19.0. Agriculture Friendly other Special Programmes Directed by Bangladesh Bank
19.1. Special Credit Programmes in Developing Agro-processing Industry
Bangladesh Bank launched a special credit programme named “Refinance Scheme in Rural
Based Agro-processing Industry” from its own source with a view to create employment
opportunities in rural areas and to reduce poverty. Due to the huge interest created among
field level entrepreneurs and for the increasing refinance applications from the banks, in

--- Page 44 ---
39

December 2012, this fund was made 200 crore taka which initially started with a revolving
fund of 100 crore taka in 2001. This fund is operated by the SME and Special program
Department of Bangladesh Bank.

The sectors under this credit programme are: Fruits processing (such as: jam, jelly, juice,
pickles, sorbet, syrup, sausage etc.); Fruits (such as: mango, guava, jackfruit, litchi,
pineapple, coconut, etc.); Vegetables (such as: tomato etc.); Pulse, sugarcane, mushroom,
milk, salt processing; processing of bread, biscuit, chanachur, chips, potato flex, semai,
lachha, noodles, atta, flour, suji, rice, muri, chirha, khoi; different type of spices powder
production, shrimp and other fish processing and freezing; meat processing; feed processing
for poultry, domestic animal and fish, jute derived goods producing industry (such as dori,
ribbon, chot, bag, carpet, sendel etc.); cold storage, flower preservation and export,
production of particle board, silk cloth production; edible oil refinery; edible oil production
from rice bran; apiculture and honey production etc. This credit facility is given in 37 sectors
including above sectors. (Annexure „D‟)

19.2. Equity and Entrepreneurship Fund (EEF)
Equity and Entrepreneurship Fund (EEF) was started sanctioning 100 crore taka in the budget
of FY 2000-2001 with a view to promote investment in potential food processing and agro
based industry and in ICT sector. The main objective of EEF is the development of socio-
economic environment of the country by developing agro based industry and ICT sector and
by creating employment opportunity. Policy was made easy in required field to create more
opportunity of participation of more entrepreneurs and to make the EEF fund more
entrepreneur-friendly. The minimum limit of project expenditure in both agro and ICT sector
has been reduced to 20 lakhs taka from previous limit of 50 lakhs Tk. So that it became very
easy to get EEF support for the small entrepreneurs. Many agro sectors are included in the
EEF fund. These are: organic fertilizer production; soya food production and soya bean
processing; fruits and vegetables-processing and preservation; apiculture and honey
processing; jam jelly, pickles and sausage production for both local and export market;
cultivation and processing of betel-nut; tortoise hatchery and cultivation; establishment of
palm-oil mills. At present, projects of non-resident Bangladeshi entrepreneurs, freedom
fighters, women entrepreneur (projects having lady managing director), tribal's‟ entrepreneurs
and the projects of hill tracts and “monga” affected area are getting priority in sanctioning
EEF support. Huge employment opportunity has been created in EEF supported projects.
Besides, the EEF fund is playing an important role in fulfilling the demand of protein
specially fish meat and egg by implementing agro-based projects.

Though from the beginning Bangladesh Bank has been totally concerned about EEF program
but from 1st June 2009, on basis of the approval of government, Bangladesh Bank has been
carrying out only the policy making, fund management and program supervision. The rest
operational activities are conducted by the Investment Corporation of Bangladesh (ICB).

--- Page 45 ---
40



19.03. Refinance Scheme of 200 Crore Taka From Bangladesh Bank‟s Own Source for
Purchasing Jute with a view to give assistance to Jute Sector|:
Refinance Scheme of 200 Crore Taka From Bangladesh Bank‟s Own Source has been
formulated for Purchasing Jute in a fair price specially from the farmers to give assistance to
Jute Sector. This fund is opened for export oriented jute mills/businessman. This fund is
operated by the Agricultural Credit and Financial Inclusion Department of Bangladesh Bank.
Scheduled banks can take refinance facilities under the signed mutual agreement with
Bangladesh Bank. It is notable that, the loan given under this fund will not be treated as
agricultural loan.

19.04. Refinance Scheme for Tk 10/- account holding small/marginal/landless
farmers/natural calamity affected low earning people and marginal/small businessmen


Bangladesh Bank has formulate a Revolving Refinance Fund of 200.00 crore taka
from its own source to disburse loan to farmers in comparatively easy terms and conditions
with a view to mobilize the rural economic activities more through remaining the Tk 10/-
Account activate. This fund is also formulated with a view to bring the financially un-served
marginal people under an institutional financial service so that Tk 10/- account holding
small/marginal/landless farmers/natural calamity affected low earning people and
marginal/small businessmen can expand their financial activities. Banks can disburse loan to
these Tk 10/- account themselves or through MRA licensed MFI under linkage program in a
profit sharing basis. This programme has been operated by the Green Banking and CSR
Department of Bangladesh Bank.

--- Page 46 ---
41

Annexure „A‟
Annual Agricultural and Rural Credit Programmes: Sector/Sub-sector

Short Term Credit
Long Term Credit
1.1
Crop Credit (Excluding Tea)
(A) Transplanted Aman
(B) Rabi Crop
Boro
II.
Wheat
III.
Potato
IV.
Sugarcane
Mustard seeds/nut
VI.
Other rabi crops (pulse,
winter vegetables)
(C) Summer Crop
1) Aush/ Sowed Aman
2) Jute
3) Maize
4) Other Summer Crops (Teel,
Summer vegetables, etc)
(D) Cotton
(E) Seed Production
(F) Other crops (ginger, Aram etc)


2.1
Irrigation Equipment
(a) Deep Tube-well
(b) Shallow tube-well
(c) LLP
(d) Hand Pump/
Water pump/Treadle Pump

2.2
Livestock Development
(a) Cow and Buffalo for Plowing
(b) Livestock development
Beef fattening
(ii)
Farm for milk production
(iii)
Goat/Sheep farm
(c) Poultry farm
(d) Vermicompost production

2.3
Agricultural Machineries
(a) Power Tiller
(b) Tractor
(c) Harvester
(d) Other Agricultural Machineries

2.4


2.5
2.6
2.7
Nursery and Horticulture
(Banana, Pineapple, Bau-Kul, Apple-Kul,
etc.)
Battle Leaf
Mushroom
Income generating Activities

1.2 Fisheries Development
(a) Fish Cultivation
(b) Prawn Cultivation
(c) Aquaculture
(d) Fish fries

1.3 Salt Cultivation
1.4 Other short term cultivation
(Banana and others)
1.5 Crop storage and marketing

2.8
Rural Transportation
(Boat, rickshaw, van, cart, etc)
2.9
Management
of
Water
Reservoir
(Jolmohal)
2.10
Other Long Term Agri Activities
(Silkworm
production,
plantation
of
mulberry, Lac, Catechu (Khoir), Culture of
silk and Shellac, etc)

--- Page 47 ---
42

Annexure „B‟
Target of Banks/Financial Institutions for Agricultural/Rural Credit Disbursement for
the FY 2014-2015
Sl
no.
Name of the Bank
Target
Sl
no.
Name of the bank
Target
A. State-owned Specialized Banks

Bangladesh Krishi Bank
4800
11
First Security Islami Bank Ltd
210
Rajshahi Krishi Unnayan Bank
1600
12
IFIC Bank Ltd
155

Sub-total
6400
13
Islami Bank Bangladesh Ltd
790



14
Jamuna Bank Ltd
121
B. State-owned Commercial Banks
15
Mercantile Bank Ltd
190
Sonali Bank Ltd.
1180
16
Mutual Trust Bank Ltd
115
Janata Bank Ltd.
750
17
National Bank Ltd
230
Agrani Bank Ltd.
660
18
NCCB Ltd
161
Rupali Bank Ltd.
150
19
One Bank Ltd
120

Sub-total
2740
20
Prime Bank Ltd
250



21
Premier Bank Limited
95
C. Foreign Commercial Banks
22
Pubali Bank Ltd
235
Standard Chartered Bank
222
23
Shahjalal Islami Bank Ltd
160
Bank Al-Falah Ltd
10
24
Social Islami Bank Ltd
160
Commercial Bank of Ceylon
Ltd
19
25
Southeast Bank Ltd
220
Citi Bank N A
15
26
Standard Bank Ltd
140
Habib Bank Ltd
27
The City Bank Ltd
160
HSBC
125
28
Trust Bank Ltd
110
National Bank of Pakistan
15
29
United Commercial Bank Ltd
250
State Bank of India
30
Uttara Bank Ltd
110
Woori Bank
31
Union Bank Ltd
50

Sub-total
420
32
South
Bangla
Agricultural
and
Commerce Bank Ltd
30



33
NRB Commercial Bank Ltd
40
D. Private Commercial Banks
34
Meghna Bank Ltd
20
AB Bank Ltd
270
35
Midland Bank Ltd
20
Al-Arafah Islami Bank Ltd
251
36
The Farmers Bank Ltd
13
Bank Asia Ltd
160
37
NRB Bank Ltd
Bangladesh Commerce Bank
Ltd
25
38
Modhumoti Bank Ltd
Basic Bank Ltd
100
39
NRB Global Bank Ltd
28
Brac Bank Ltd
190

Sub-total
5990
Dhaka Bank Ltd
185



Dutch Bangla Bank Ltd.
190



Eastern Bank Ltd
165



10
Exim Bank Ltd
260



Grand Total Target is 15,550 Crores Taka

--- Page 48 ---
43

Annexure „C‟

Credit Norms of Vermicompost Production
A. Setting up a new project
Purchase
of Cow (2
nos.)
Chaari/House
building
Purchase
of Earth-
worm
(3kgs)
House/Shed
Construction
Other
Purchase
Expenditure
including cow
purchase
Expenditure
excluding
cow
purchase
2,00,000
30,000
10,000
49,000
1,000
2,90,000
90,000

B. For Existing farming
The peoples who have already owner of cows, they will get loan only for „clay made
container‟/house construction, shed construction and for purchase of earth worms. In this case
the maximum limit of a loan is 90,000.00 Tk.
Loan eligible criteria: Producer family/institution on single or partnership basis.
Repayment time: Within 04 (Four) years from the date of disbursement including 03 (Three)
months of grace period.
Amount of collateral: In a new project collateral may be fixed up by the banker-customer
relationship and in case of existing farm loan may be disbursed without collateral.

--- Page 49 ---
44

Annexure „D‟
List of Approved Agro Based Industry
01) Processed fruit (jam, jelly, juice, pickle, sarbat, syrup, sausage etc.) producing industry;
02) Processing of fruits (tomato, mango, guava, sugar cane, jack fruit, litchi, pineapple,
coconut etc.), vegetables and pulses;
03) Producing of bread, biscuit, semai, lachha, chanachur etc.
04) Processing of atta, flour and suji;
05) Processing of mushroom and Spirulina;
06) Starch, glucose, dextrose and other starch product producing industry;
07) Milk processing (milk pasteurization, powder milk, ice-cream, condensed milk, sweet,
cheese, ghee, butter, chocolate, curd etc.);
08) Processed food derived from potato (chips, potato flex, starch etc.);
09) Various spices-powder producing industry;
10) Refining of edible oil and hydrogenation industry;
11) Salt processing industry;
12) Processing and freezing of shrimp and other fishes;
13) Herbal and medicinal cosmetics producing industry;
14) Eunany and ayurvedik drugs industry;
15) Feed industry (poultry, dairy and fish);
16) Seed processing and preservation;
17) Jute based goods producing (rope, thread, chot, bag, carpet, sandal etc.);
18) Silk producing industry;
19) Producing and repairing of agro machineries and equipments;
20) Processing of rice, muri, chirwa, khoi etc.;
21) Aromatic rice;
22) Tea processing industry;
23) Coconut oil producing industry (if raw crop is collected from local coconut);
24) Processing of rubber tap and lakhkha;
25) Cold Storage (Processing and preservation of potato for both consumption and seed, fruit
and vegetables produced by local farmers.);
26) Making/producing of furniture from wood, bamboo and cane (excluding cottage
industry);
27) Flower processing and exporting farm;
28) Meat processing farm;
29) Organic fertilizer, compost fertilizer and guti urea;
30) Producing of bio-pesticides and neem-pesticides;
31) Apiculture/honey producing industry;
32) Project of rubber goods production;
33) Particle board;
34) Mustered oil producing industry;
35) Poultry and dairy industry;
36) Project for bio-gas and electricity production from rice husk and cow dung and
37) Edible oil from rice bran industry.

--- Page 50 ---
45

Annexure „E‟
Credit Norms for Crop Production: The Fiscal Year 2014-2015
SL
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Cost Per Acre (Tk.)
Balanc
ed
Fertiliz
er
Seed
Irrigatio
Macha/
Case/
Colum
Pestici
de
Land
Preparatio
Mechaniz
ed/
traditional
Labor
Season
Wise
Rent for
crop
productio
Total
Amount
of
Credit
per Acre
Amount of
credit for for
maximum 5
acre
(maximum
2.5 acre for
Sugarcane &
potato) land
Amount
of credit
for
minimum
0.50
bigha of
land per
borrower
10
11
12
13
14
Cereal Crop
Aush (HYV)
4605
360
1300
750
3200
15600
6000
31815
31815
159075
5303
Aush (Local)
2706
360
650
500
3200
13000
6000
26416
26416
132080
4403
Planted Amon (HYV)
5592
500
1300
750
3200
15600
6000
32942
32942
164710
5490
Sowed Amon (Local)
3005
350
750
3200
13000
6000
26305
26305
131525
4384
Transplanted Amon (Local)
1191
350
3200
13000
5000
22741
22741
113705
3790
Boro (Hybrid)
6583
1200
6500
1000
3200
20800
6000
45283
45283
226415
7547
Boro (HYV)
5951
680
6500
750
3200
20800
6000
43881
43881
219405
7313
Boro (Local)
3432
550
3250
500
3200
15600
6000
32532
32532
162660
5422
Wheat (Irrigated)
10389
2160
2600
200
3200
13000
6000
37549
37549
187745
6258
10
Kaun
2315
540
1300
500
3200
6500
5000
19355
19355
96775
3225
11
Millet (Sorgom)
4722
500
1300
200
2400
6500
3000
18622
18622
93110
3104
12
Bajra(Palmillet)
2315
500
1300
200
2400
6500
3000
16251
16251
81075
2703
13
Barley or Zob
2354
500
1300
200
2400
6500
3000
16254
16254
81270
2709
14
Proso Millet
2264
420
1300
300
2400
6500
5000
18184
18184
90920
3031
15
Maize (kharif)
11476
900
1300
500
3200
9100
5000
31476
31476
157380
5246
16
Maize (Rabi)
11476
900
1300
500
3200
13000
5000
35376
35376
176880
5896
NB: A farmer taking another loan but not classified yet can be given loan at 4% concessional rate for pulse, oilseed, spices and maize cultivation.

--- Page 51 ---
46

SL
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Cost Per Acre (Tk.)
Balanc
ed
Fertiliz
er
Seed
Irrigatio
Macha/
Case/
Column
Pesticid
Land
Preparatio
Mechaniz
ed/
traditional
Labor
Season
Wise Rent
for crop
productio
Total
Amount
of Credit
per Acre
Amount of
credit for for
maximum 5 acre
(maximum 2.5
acre for
Sugarcane &
potato) land
Amount of
credit for
minimum
0.50 bigha of
land per
borrower
10
11
12
13
14
Cash Crop:
17
Jute
8180
300
500
4000
13000
3000
28980
28980
144900
4830
18
Shan Jute
6040
300
500
3200
6500
3000
19540
19540
97700
3257
19
Sugarcane
16303
3000
2600
1800
3200
13000
6000
45903
45903
114757.5
7651
20
Betel-leaf
91214
50000
5417
130000
5000
4800
91000
20000
397431
397431
1987155
66239
21
Cotton (American)
10796
400
1300
700
3200
13000
6000
35396
35396
176980
5899
22
Cotton (Comilla Hilly)
9434
400
1300
700
3200
13000
6000
34034
34034
170170
5672
Vegetables:
23
Bean
7511
660
1300
12000
600
3200
10400
5000
40671
40671
203355
6779
24
Red Amaranth
7200
300
650
300
3200
5200
3000
19850
19850
99250
3308
25
Spinach
6852
128
650
300
3200
5200
3000
19330
19330
96650
3222
26
Bindweed
7954
135
650
300
3200
5200
3000
20439
20439
102195
3407
27
Bottle-guard
8500
125
650
18000
300
3200
5200
5000
40975
40975
204875
6829
28
Radish
9245
188
1300
500
3200
5200
5000
24633
24633
123165
4106
29
Cauliflower
9873
700
2600
500
3200
9100
5000
30973
30973
154865
5162
30
Cabbage
9933
700
2600
500
3200
9100
5000
31033
31033
155165
5172
31
Kohlrabi
12305
700
2600
500
3200
9100
5000
33405
33405
167025
5568
32
Turnip
12305
700
2600
500
3200
9100
5000
33405
33405
167025
5568
33
Carrot
8492
4500
1950
500
3200
5200
5000
28842
28842
144210
4807
34
Garden pea
7284
680
650
500
3200
5200
5000
22514
22514
112570
3752
35
Yard long bean
7389
1200
650
4500
500
3200
6500
5000
28948
28948
144740
4825
36
Lettuce
7432
700
1950
500
3200
9100
5000
27882
27882
139410
4647
37
Brinjal
8729
100
1950
1500
3200
6500
5000
26979
26979
134895
4497

--- Page 52 ---
47

SL
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Cost Per Acre (Tk.)
Balanc
ed
Fertiliz
er
Seed
Irrigatio
Macha/
Case/
Column
Pesticid
Land
Preparatio
Mechaniz
ed/
traditional
Labor
Season
Wise Rent
for crop
productio
Total
Amount
of Credit
per Acre
Amount of
credit for for
maximum 5
acre
(maximum
2.5 acre for
Sugarcane &
potato) land
Amount of
credit for
minimum
0.50 bigha
of land per
borrower
10
11
12
13
14
38
Tomato (summer)
8295
100
650
4500
1000
3200
10400
5000
33145
33145
165725
5524
39
Tomato (robi)
8295
100
1950
4500
500
3200
10400
5000
33945
33945
169725
5658
40
Cucumber
7810
100
650
12000
500
3200
6500
5000
35760
35760
178800
5960
41
Bitter Gourd
7858
1030
2600
12000
500
3200
6500
5000
38688
38688
193440
6448
42
Pointed Gourd
7810
2000
650
12000
500
3200
6500
6000
38660
38660
193300
6443
43
Ladies Finger
8305
240
1300
500
3200
5200
3000
21745
21745
108725
3624
44
Pumpkin
8373
100
1300
500
3200
5200
3000
21673
21673
108365
3612
45
Ash Gourd
8373
100
1300
18000
500
3200
5200
3000
39673
39673
198365
6612
46
Teasle Gourd
7860
1200
1300
12000
500
3200
10400
5000
41460
41460
207300
6910
47
Ridge Gourd
8373
100
1300
12000
500
3200
6500
5000
36973
36973
184865
6162
48
Snake Gourd
8373
100
1300
12000
500
3200
6500
5000
36973
36973
184865
6162
49
Dhundhol
8373
100
1300
12000
500
3200
6500
5000
36973
36973
184865
6162
50
Indian Spinach
7540
400
1300
500
3200
6500
5000
24440
24440
122200
4073
51
French Bean
8151
200
1300
500
3200
7800
5000
26151
26151
130755
4359
52
Stem Amaranth
7866
100
650
400
3200
6500
3000
21716
21716
108580
3619
Spices:
53
Pepper
9095
195
1300
600
4000
13000
5000
33190
33190
165950
5532
54
Onion
9229
18250
1300
500
4800
6500
5000
45579
45579
227895
7597
55
Garlic
9427
24000
1300
500
4800
6500
5000
51527
51527
257635
8588
56
Ginger
9261
64000
1300
500
3200
7800
5000
91061
91061
455305
15177
57
Turmeric
8653
80000
650
500
3200
6500
5000
104503
104503
522515
17417
58
Coriander
8511
100
1300
500
3200
5200
3000
21811
21811
109055
3635
NB: A farmer taking another loan but not classified yet can be given loan at 4% concessional rate for pulse, oilseed, spices and maize cultivation.

--- Page 53 ---
48

SL
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Cost Per Acre (Tk.)
Balanc
ed
Fertiliz
er
Seed
Irrigatio
Mach
Case/
Colu
mn
Pestici
de
Land
Preparatio
Mechaniz
ed/
traditional
Labor
Season
Wise
Rent for
crop
productio
Total
Amount
of
Credit
per Acre
Amount of
credit for for
maximum 5
acre
(maximum
2.5 acre for
Sugarcane &
potato) land
Amount
of credit
for
minimum
0.50
bigha of
land per
borrower
10
11
12
13
14
59
Onion (Seed)
9381
47500
2600
3000
3200
19500
6000
91181
91181
225975
15065
60
Cumin
8129
1100
1300
500
3200
6500
5000
25729
25729
128645
4288
Fruits:
61
Banana
26254
14250
2600
47500
1000
3200
9100
9000
112904
112904
564520
18817
62
Papaw
25272
9150
1300
50000
500
3200
9100
9000
107522
107522
537610
17920
63
Pineapple
11296
18000
1950
500
3200
9100
9000
53046
53046
265230
8841
64
Watermelon
8629
5000
2600
1000
3200
10400
5000
35829
35829
179145
5972
65
Bangi/Futti
9026
400
1300
500
3200
7800
5000
27226
27226
136130
4538
66
Mango
74810
6600
1300
3000
3200
7800
20000
116710
116710
583550
19452
67
Lemon
25005
9000
650
500
3200
6500
12000
56855
56855
284275
9476
68
Bermese Grape
14140
9000
650
500
3200
6500
12000
45990
45990
229950
7665
69
Guava
15536
9000
650
500
3200
10400
12000
51286
51286
256430
8548
70
Strawberry
15737
10000
1300
1000
3200
13000
12000
146237
146237
364700
24313
71
Litchi
21700
4950
1300
3000
3200
7800
20000
61950
61950
309750
10325
72
Orange (New
production)
16692
5670
1300
1000
3200
9100
9000
45962
45962
229810
7660
73
Orange (Enhance
production of old Farm)
35751
1300
1000
3200
9100
9000
59351
59351
296755
9892
74
Sweet Orange
8487
8750
3250
500
5600
7800
6000
40387
40387
201935
6731
75
Sapota
8360
3000
3250
500
5600
7800
6000
34510
34510
172550
5752

--- Page 54 ---
49

SL
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Cost Per Acre (Tk.)
Balanc
ed
Fertiliz
er
Seed
Irrigatio
Mach
Case/
Colu
mn
Pestici
de
Land
Preparatio
Mechaniz
ed/
traditional
Labor
Season
Wise
Rent for
crop
productio
Total
Amount
of
Credit
per Acre
Amount of
credit for for
maximum 5
acre
(maximum
2.5 acre for
Sugarcane &
potato) land
Amount
of credit
for
minimum
0.50
bigha of
land per
borrower
10
11
12
13
14
76
Hog Plum
8542
1500
3250
500
5600
6500
6000
31892
31892
159460
5315
77
Coconut
10030
4500
3250
500
5600
6500
6000
36380
36380
181900
6063
78
BAUkul/Applekul
18288
15750
1300
3000
3200
26000
20000
87538
87538
437690
14590
Root Crops:
78
Potato (HYV)
9190
28400
1950
3000
3200
9100
5000
59840
59840
149600
9973
79
Sweet Potato
8921
5000
1300
500
3200
6500
3000
28421
28421
71052.5
4737
80
Aroid
7988
4000
1300
500
3200
6500
3000
26488
26488
132440
4415
81
Pani Kochu
8162
15000
650
500
3200
6500
3000
37012
37012
185060
6169
82
Owl Kochu
9435
8000
1300
500
3200
6500
3000
31935
31935
159675
5323
Oil Seeds:
84
Mustard (HYV)
8916
200
650
500
3200
6500
3000
22966
22966
114830
3828
85
Mustard (Local)
8209
200
650
500
3200
6500
3000
22259
22259
111295
3710
86
Groundnut (Kharif)
2515
2860
1300
500
3200
10400
3000
23775
23775
118875
3963
87
Groundnut (Rabi)
2515
2860
1300
500
3200
10400
3000
23775
23775
118875
3963
88
Sunflower
8809
300
1300
500
3200
3900
3000
21009
21009
105045
3502
89
Sesame (Kharif)
8165
200
650
500
3200
5200
3000
20915
20915
104575
3486
90
Sesame (Rabi)
8165
200
650
500
3200
5200
3000
20915
20915
104575
3486
91
Soft Flower
6978
200
650
300
3200
3900
3000
18228
18228
91140
3038
92
Linseed
896
200
650
300
3200
3900
3000
12146
12146
60730
2024
93
Soybean (Kharif)
8377
2100
500
3200
5200
3000
22377
22377
111885
3710
94
Soybean (Rabi)
8377
2100
1300
500
3200
5200
3000
23677
23677
118385
3946
NB: A farmer taking another loan but not classified yet can be given loan at 4% concessional rate for pulse, oilseed, spices and maize cultivation.

--- Page 55 ---
50

SL
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Cost Per Acre (Tk.)
Balanc
ed
Fertiliz
er
Seed
Irrigatio
Mach
Case/
Colu
mn
Pestici
de
Land
Preparatio
Mechaniz
ed/
traditional
Labor
Season
Wise
Rent for
crop
productio
Total
Amount
of Credit
per Acre
Amount of
credit for for
maximum 5
acre
(maximum
2.5 acre for
Sugarcane
& potato)
land
Amount
of credit
for
minimum
0.50
bigha of
land per
borrower
10
11
12
13
14
Pulses:
95
Mungbean (Kharif-1)
1594
720
650
500
3200
6500
3000
16164
16164
80820
2694
96
Mungbean (Rabi)
1594
720
650
500
3200
6500
3000
16164
16164
80820
2694
97
Blackgram ( Kharip)
681
1020
650
500
3200
5200
3000
14251
14251
71255
2375
98
Blackgram (Rabi)
681
1020
650
500
3200
5200
3000
14251
14251
71255
2375
99
Chickpea
1651
1320
650
500
3200
5200
3000
15521
15521
77605
2587
100
Aurhor
13512
500
650
500
3200
5200
3000
26562
26562
132810
4427
101
Lentil
2174
1232
650
500
3200
6500
3000
17256
17256
86280
2876
102
Grasspea
709
1000
650
500
3200
6500
3000
15559
15559
77795
2593
103
Pea
619
1650
650
500
3200
6500
3000
16119
16119
80595
2687
104
Cowpea
619
1650
650
500
3200
6500
3000
16119
16119
80595
2687
Flowers:
105
Gerbera
54630
420000
227500
312000
5000
295200
494000
30000
1838330
1838330
9191650

612778
106
Rose
58220
120000
15600
30400
5000
280000
30000
539220
53220
2696100
17740
107
Gladiolus
24530
240000
5417
2500
5000
37500
30000
344947
344947
1724735
114982
108
Tuberose
21385
10000
5417
1500
5000
25000
30000
98302
98302
491510

32767
109
Marigold
19840
25000
6500
2500
5000
36000
30000
124840
124840
624200
41613

--- Page 56 ---
51



Others:
Production Cost Per Acre (Tk.)
SL
No.
Name of the Crop
Balanced
Fertilizer
Seed
Irrigati
on
Ma
cha
Ca
se/
Col
um
Pestici
de
Land
Preparatio
Mechaniz
ed/
traditional
Labor
Season
Wise
Rent for
crop
productio
Total
Amount
of Credit
per Acre
Amount of
credit for for
maximum 5
acre
(maximum
2.5 acre for
Sugarcane
& potato)
land
Amount
of credit
for
minimum
0.50
bigha of
land per
borrower
10
11
12
13
14
110 Apiculture
Cost of 50 boxes preparation including bees
2400*50=120000
41600
Box
transportati
on & others
30000
191600
191600
958000
(maximum
limit)
31933
(minimum
limit)
111
Agor
6155
12000
5850
5000
3200
13500
10000
55705
55705
139263
9284
112
Oil Pum
15750
300
2600
500
3200
10400
9000
41750
41750
104375
6958
113
Mushroom seed
production
Autocleb
3 nos
Clean
kench
1 nos
Air
Conditi
oner 3
nos
195000
Iron
rack 20
nos
300000
Running
cost: wood
powder,
wheet husk
250000
6 labor
39000
Electricity
connectio
n & others
80000
1114000
1114000
1114000
371333
114
Mushroom
production
(500kg/month)
Iron rack
20 nos
300000
Runnin
g cost
60000
Labor
32500
392500
392500
391250
130833
(Minimum)
115
Dhoincha
830
300
3200
2600
3250
10180
10180
50900
1697

--- Page 57 ---
52

Annexure „F‟
Crop Production Calendar and Payment Schedule: 2014-2015
Sl.
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Season
Loan Payment
Date
Loan Disbursement
Period
Harvesting Period
Cereal Crops:
Aush (HYV)
1 February-31 May
1 July- 31 August
31 December
Aush (Local)
1 March-30 April
1 July- 31 July
31 December
Planted Amon (HYV)
1 June-30 September
1 November-31
December
31 March
Planted Amon (Local)
1 June-30 September
1 November-31
December
31 March
Sowed Amon (Local)
1 March- 30 May
1 November-31
December
28 February
Boro (Hybrid/HYV)
15 October- 15 March
1 May- 30 June
30 September
Boro (Local)
1 October- 31 March
1 April- 30 June
30 September
Wheat (Irrigated)
1 November- 15
December
31 January- 1
March
30 June
Kaun
1 October- 14
November
14 February- 13
April
15 June
10
Millet (Sorgom)
1 October- 14
November
14 February- 13
April
15 June
11
Bajra(Palmillet)
1 October- 14
November
14 February- 13
April
15 June
12
Barley or Job
1 October- 14
November
14 February- 13
April
15 June
13
China
1 October- 14
November
14 February- 13
April
15 June
14
Maize (kharif)
1 March- 30 April
1 June- 31 July
31 August
15
Maize (Rabi)
1 October-14
November
14 February- 13
April
15 June
(B) Cash Crops:
16
Jute
15 February- 30 April
15 June- 15
September
15 November
17
Shan Jute
15 February- 15
March
15 June- 15
September
15 November
18
Sugarcane
1 October- 31 March
1 November- 28
February
31 March
19
Betel-leaf
Throughout the year
Throughout the year
Next 6 Months
20
Cotton (American)
1 July- 30 September
15 December- 15
March
30 April
21
Cotton (Comilla Hilly)
1 April- 31 May
15 November-31
December
31 March
NB: Loan disbursement time can be rationally extended based on regional differences in ideal
planting time and delay of planting due to natural calamity.

--- Page 58 ---
53

Sl.
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Season
Loan Payment
Date
Loan Disbursement Period
Harvesting Period
(C) Vegetables:
22
Bean
1 August- 30
September
1 November- 28
February
30 June
23
Red Amaranth
15 January- 15
September
15 November- 28
February
30 June
24
Spinach
15 January- 31
December
1 October- 31
March
30 September
25
Bindweed
1 November-31
December
1 April- 31 May
31 July
26
Bottle-guard
15 October- 15
November
1 January- 31
March
30 June
27
Radish
1 October- 30
November
1 January- 28
February
30 June
28
Cauliflower
1 October- 30
November
1 January- 28
February
30 June
29
Cabbage
1 October- 30
November
1 January- 28
February
30 June
30
Kohlrabi
1 November- 31
December
1 January- 28
February
30 June
31
Turnip
1 October- 30
November
1 January- 28
February
30 June
32
Carrot
1 October- 30
November
1 February- 31
March
30 June
33
Garden pea
1 October- 30
November
1 February- 31
March
30 June
34
Yard long bean
15 January- 14 March
14 April- 15
September
30 June
35
Lettuce
1 October- 30
November
1 February- 31
March
30 June
36
Ladies Finger
Throughout the year
Throughout the year Next 3 Months
37
Brinjal
Throughout the year
Throughout the year Next 3 Months
38
Tomato
15 August- 31
December
1 October- 31 Mach
30 April
39
Tomato (summer)
1 February-31March
1 April- 31 May
30 November
40
Cucumber
1 February-31March
1 April- 31 May
30 November
41
Bitter Gourd
Throughout the year
Throughout the year Next 6 Months
42
Pointed Gourd
15 October- 30
November
15 March- 30 April
30 June
43
Pumpkin
Throughout the year
Throughout the year Next 3 Months
44
Ash Gourd
Throughout the year
Throughout the year Next 3 Months
45
Bitter Gourd
Throughout the year
Throughout the year Next 6 Months
46
Teasle Gourd
1 March- 31 March
31 May- 30 June
30 November
47
Ridge Gourd
1 February- 31 March
1 April- 31 May
30 November
NB: Loan disbursement time can be rationally extended based on regional differences in ideal planting time
and delay of planting due to natural calamity.

--- Page 59 ---
54

Sl.
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Season
Loan Payment
Date
Loan Disbursement
Period
Harvesting Period
48
Snake Gourd
1 February- 31 March
1 April- 31 May
30 November
49
Dhundhol
1 February- 31 March
1 April- 31 May
30 November
50
Indian Spinach
1 February- 31 March
1 April- 31 May
30 November
51
Stem Amaranth
Throughout the year
Throughout the year Next 1 Month
52
French Bean
1 October- 30
November
1 January- 28
February
30 June
Spices:
53
Pepper
Throughout the year
Throughout the year
Next 3 Months
54
Onion
1 November- 31
December
1 April- 31 May
31 July
55
Garlic
1 November- 31
December
1 April- 31 May
31 July
56
Ginger
1 November- 30 June
1 April- 30 November 31 January
57
Turmeric
1 March- 31 April
1 December- 31
January
30 June
58
Coriander
15 February- 13 April
13 February- 14
March
15 June
59
Onion (Seed)
October- November
March- April
Next 3 Months
60
Cumin
1 October- 31 December
15 November- 28
February
30 June
(E) Fruits:
61
Papaw*
1 February- 31 March
15 September- 15
November
28 February
62
Banana*
1 February- 31 March
15 September- 30
November
31March
63
Pineapple
16 March- 14 May
15 March- 14 May
(Next year)
14 November (Next
year)
64
Watermelon
15 October- 31 January
1 March- 15 June
31 October
65
Bangi/Futti
1 February- 16 March
1 May- 16 June
31 October
66
Mango
15 April- 15 July
1 April- 15 August
15 July (harvesting
year)
67
Litchi
February- March
May- June
August- September
(harvesting year)
68
BAUkul/Applekul
January- February
March- April
March-April
(harvesting year)
69
Orange
April- May
For new garden: 4-5
years later in
December and for
old garden in
December of
concerned year
January-February
(next Year)
70
Strawberry
October- November
February-March
Next Year from
Harvesting Month
71
Lemon
15 April- 15 July
15 May- 15 August
15 July (Next year)
*Loan can be given all the year round.

--- Page 60 ---
55

Sl.
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Season
Loan Payment Date
Loan Disbursement Period
Harvesting Period
72
Bermese Grape
15 April- 15 July
15 April-15 August
15 August
(harvesting year)
73
Guava
1 June -30 August
15July-30 August
1 October (next
Year)
74
Sweet Orange
May- June
December- January
September- October
75
Sapota
May-June
July- August
February- March
(next year)
76
Hog Plum
May-June
September- October
November-
December
(F) Root Crops:
78
Potato (HYV)
1 September- 31
December
1 February- 31 March 30 August
79
Potato (Local)
1 September- 31
December
1 February- 31 March 30 August
80
Sweet Potato
1 September- 31
December
1 April- 31 May
31 August
81
Aroid
1 January-28 February
1 August- 30
September
31 December
82
Pani Kochu
January- February
December-
January
May- June (next
year)
83
Owl Kochu
January- February
December-
January
May- June (next
year)
Oil Seeds:
84
Mustard (HYV)
1 October -30
November
15 January- 31
March
30 June
85
Mustard (Local)
1 October -30
November
15 January- 31
March
30 June
86
Groundnut (Kharif)
1 January- 31 March
1 August- 30
September
31 December
87
Groundnut (Rabi)
1 October -30
November
1 April- 31 May
31 August
88
Sunflower
1 October -15
November
1 February- 31
March
31 July
89
Sesame (Kharif)
1 February- 13 April
1 June- 30 June
30 November
90
Sesame (Rabi)
1 October -30
November
1 January- 15
March
30 June
91
Gorjon Sesame
1 October -14 December 15 January- 15
March
31 July
92
Soft Flower
1 October -14 December 15 January- 15
March
31 July


NB: Loan disbursement time can be rationally extended based on regional differences in ideal planting time
and delay of planting due to natural calamity.

--- Page 61 ---
56

Sl.
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Season
Loan Payment
Date
Loan Disbursement Period
Harvesting Period
Pulses:
93
Mungbean (Kharif-1)
1 March- 15 April
13 May- 1 July
1 October
94
Mungbean (Rabi)
1 October- 15 November
15 December- 28
February
1 August
95
Blackgram ( Kharip)
15 May- 14 July
15 August- 15
October
1 January
96
Blackgram (Rabi)
15 October- 30
November
7 January- 28
February
31 July
97
Chickpea
15 October- 30
November
15 March- 30 April
30 June
98
Aurhor
15 October- 30
November
15 March- 30 April
31 July
99
Lentil
1 October- 30 November
14 January - 14
March
14 May
100
Grasspea
1 October- 30 November
15 January - 14
March
14 May
101
Pea
15 October- 30
November
15 March- 30 April
31 July
102
Cowpea
15 October- 30
November
15 March- 30 April
31 July
103
Soybean (Kharif)
15 July- 30 September
1 November- 31
January
30 June
104
Soybean (Rabi)
1 November- 31 January
1 March- 31 May
31 October
(I) Flowers:
105
Gerbera
September- December
December- November May-June
106
Rose
October- February
February- March
May-June
107
Gladiolus
September- January
January- December
May-June
108
Tuberose
October- February
December- January
May-June
109
Marigold
October-December
May-June
January-June
May-December
March-April
August-September
(J) Other Crops:
110
Agor
May-June
After 15-20 Years
After 15-20 Years
111
Apiculture
November-December
15 February/15 June
From honey
collecting month
112
Oil Pum
June-July
After 5-7 years
After Harvesting
113
Mushroom seed production
Throughout the Year
Throughout the Year
After Harvesting
114
Mushroom production
Throughout the Year
Throughout the Year
After Harvesting
115
Dhoincha
April-May
July- August
31 December
NB: Loan disbursement time can be rationally extended based on regional differences in ideal
planting time and delay of planting due to natural calamity.

--- Page 62 ---
57

1. Production Cost of Mushroom Seed ( Spawn)
Sl.
No.
Crop
Production cost of 25000 packets spawn
Total cost
AutoClev
(03 nos.)
Clean
Bench
(1nos.)
Air
Conditio
ner
(3 nos.)
Iron
rack
(20
nos.)
Runni
ng cost
Labor
(6me
Electr
icity
others
Mushroom
Seed
150000
100000
180000
300000
250000
39000
86667
1105667
Requirements for Mushroom Seed Production:
 Laboratory Building (3000sq ft)
 3000 sq ft open space
 For rented land 3 years rent contract form is necessary
 Vehicles transportation facilities
 Electricity connection
 Training from National Mushroom Development and Extension Centre or institute of
Department of Agricultural Extension.

Loan Timeframe: Throughout the Year

2. Production Cost of Mushroom
Sl.
No.
Crop
For 500 Kg Mushroom/month
Comment
Iron rack
(20 nos.)
Running
cost
Labor
(3men)
Total cost
Mushroom 300000
60000
32500
392500
Running cost facility
will be set in next
month
Requirements for Mushroom Production:
 Cultivation House (3000sq ft)
 1000 sq ft open space
 For rented land 3 years rent contract form is necessary
 Vehicles transportation facilities
 Electricity connection
 Training from National Mushroom Development and Extension Centre or institute of
Department of Agricultural Extension.

Loan Timeframe: All the Year round.

--- Page 63 ---
58

Annexure „G‟
Credit Norms of Crop Production: 2014-2015
Annual Production Plan of Crop arrangement/ mixed crop/ Relay cultivation
Crop (per acre) Credit limit in Taka (per acre)
Sl.
no.
Crop
arrangement
Kharif-2
Rabi
Kharif-1
Total
Crop
intensity
Planted Amon
(HYV)- Potato- Boro
(HYV)
Planted
Amon (HYV)
32942
Potato- Boro (HYV)
59840+43881
92722
300%
Planted Aush
(HYV)- Potato-
Sowed Amon
Planted
Amon (HYV)
32942
Potato 59840
Sowed Aush
(HYV) 31815
124597
300%
Potato-panikochu
Potato 59840
Panikochu
37012
96852
200%
Wheat- Mungbean-
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Planted
Amon (HYV)
32942
Wheat 37549
Mungbean
16164
87455
300%
Maize(Rabi)-Dhoincha-
Planted Amon (HYV)
Planted Amon
(local) 26305
Maize 35376
Dhoincha
10180
71861
300%
Boro(HYV)-Planted
Amon (HYV)
Planted
Amon (HYV)
32942
Boro(HYV)
43881
76823
200%
Blackgram (Rabi)-
Maize(kharif)
Blackgram 14251
Maize(kharif)
31476
45727
200%
Wheat-Jute- Planted
Amon (HYV)
Planted Amon
(HYV) 32942
Wheat 37549
Jute 28980
99471
300%
Potato- Sowed Amon ---
Potato 59840
Sowed Amon
22741
82581
200%
10
Planted Amon
(local)-Potato-
Dhoincha
Planted
Amon (local)
26305
Potato 59840
Dhoincha
10180
96325
300%
11
Potato-Aroid(Mukhi)
Potato 59840
Aroid 26588
86428
200%
12
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Sunflower - Mungbean
Planted
Amon (HYV)
32942
Sunflower 21009
Mungbean
16164
70115
300%
13
Planted Amon
(HYV)- Sunflower -
Dhoincha
Planted
Amon (HYV)
32942
Sunflower 21009
Dhoincha
10180
64131
300%
14
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Mustard -Dhoincha
Planted Amon
(HYV) 20500
Mustard 22960
Dhoincha
2700
53640
300%
15
Cotton-Chickpea
Cotton 35396
Chickpea 15521
50917
200%
16
Blackgram-
Mungbean-Planted
Aush
Blackgram
14251
Mungbean 16164
Sowed Aush
(HYV) 31815
62230
300%
17
Mustard- Planted
Aush
Mustard 22966
Sowed Aush
(HYV) 31815
54781
200%
18
Blackgram- Mustard-
Lentil-Aush(local)
Blackgram
14251
Mustard+Lentil
22966+17256
Aush (local)
26416
80889
300%
19
Planted Amon
(local)- Mustard-
Boro (HYV)
Planted
Amon (local)
26305
Mustard 22966
Boro (HYV)
43881
93152
300%
20
Planted Amon
(local)- Mustard -
Dhoincha
Planted
Amon (local)
26305
Mustard 22966
Dhoincha
10180
59451
300%
21
Sesame (Rabi)-
Aush(HYV)
Sesame (Rabi)-
20925
Aush (HYV)
31815
52740
200%
22
Sweet Potato- Kaun
Sweet Potato
28421
Kaun 19350
47771
200%

--- Page 64 ---
59

Sl.
no.
Crop arrangement
Kharif-2
Rabi
Kharif-1
Total
Crop
intensity
23
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Potato- Maize (Kharif)
Planted Amon
(HYV) 32942
Potato 59840
Maize 31076
123858
300%
24
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Mustard –Aush(HYV)
Planted Amon
(HYV) 32942
Mustard 22966
Aush (HYV)
31815
87723
300%
25
Planted Amon (local)-
Mustard –Planted
Aush(HYV)
Planted Amon
(local) 26406
Mustard 22966
Aush (HYV)
31815
81187
300%
26
Radish-Potato-Jute
Radish
24633
Potato (HYV)
59840
Jute 28980
113453
300%
27
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Potato –Aush(HYV)
Planted Amon
(HYV) 32942
Potato (HYV)
59840
Aush (HYV)
31815
124597
300%
28
Mustard- Jute
Mustard 22966
Jute 28980
51946
200%
29
Potato- Jute
Potato (HYV)
59840
Jute 28980
88820
200%
30
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Potato(local)- Boro
(HYV)
Planted Amon
(HYV) 32942
Potato(local)-
Boro (HYV)
37050+43881
113873
300%
31
Lentil- Jute
Lentil 17256
Jute 28980
46236
200%
32
Lentil+Mustard-Jute
Mustard+Lentil
23170+17256
Jute 28980
69406
300%
33
Mungbean-Lentil-Jute
Mungbean
16200
Lentil 17256
Jute 28980
62436
300%
34
Planted Amon (local)-
Lentil-Jute
Planted Amon
(local) 26406
Lentil 17256
Jute 28980
72642
300%
35
Radish-Lentil-Jute
Radish
24633
Lentil 17256
Jute 28980
70869
300%
36
Sowed Amon- Mustard
–Sowed Aush
Mustard 22966
Sowed Amon+
Aush(local)
22741+26416
72123
300%
37
Sesame – Sowed Aush ---
Sesame
21050
Aush (local)
22741
43791
200%
38
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Soyabean-Jute
Planted Amon
(HYV) 32942
Soyabean
17680
Jute 28980
79602
300%
39
Muastard-Sowed
Aush-Sowed Amon
Mustard 22966
Sowed Amon+
Sowed Aush
26416+22741
72123
300%
40
Mungbean-Wheat-Jute
Mungbean 16200
Wheat 37549
Jute 28980
82729
300%
41
Blackgram- Lentil-
Sowed Aush
Blackgram
14251
Lentil 17256
Aush (HYV)
31815
63322
300%
42
Planted Amon (local)-
Chickpea- Jute
Planted Amon
(local) 26406
Chickpea 15526
Jute 28980
70912
300%
43
Groundnut- Sowed
Aush
Groundnut
23855
Aush (local)
26416
50271
200%
44
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Sweet Potato -
Dhoincha
Planted Amon
(HYV) 32942
Sweet Potato
23855
Dhoincha
10180
71722
300%
45
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Soyabean-
Aush(HYV)
Planted Amon
(HYV) 32942
Soyabean
17680
Aush (HYV)
31815
82437
300%
46
Planted Amon (HYV)-
Sweet Potato
Planted Amon
(HYV) 32942
Sweet Potato
28600
61542
200%
47
Jute- Pepper
Pepper 33190
Jute 28980
62170
200%
48
Potato- Pepper
Potato 59840
Pepper 33190
93030
200%
49
Onion- Planted
Amon
Planted Amon
(HYV) 32942
Onion 45579
78521
200%

--- Page 65 ---
60

Sl.
no.
Crop
arrangement
Kharif-2
Rabi
Kharif-1
Total
Crop
intensity
50
Garlic-Planted
Amon
Planted
Amon
32942
Garlic 51527
84469
200%
51
Watermelon-
Sowed Amon
Water melon
35829
Sowed Amon
22741
58570
200%
Mixed Crop:
52
Lentil+ Mustard
Lentil+ Mustard
17256+ 22966
40222
200%
53
Sugarcane+ Potato
Sugarcane+
Potato 45903+
59850
105753
200%
54
Sugarcane+
Mustard
Sugarcane+
Mustard 45903+
22966
68869
200%
55
Sugarcane+ Lentil
Sugarcane+
Lentil 45903+
17256
63159
200%
56
Sugarcane+
Chickpea
Sugarcane+
Chickpea45903+
15521
61424
200%
57
Sugarcane+
Soyabean
Sugarcane+
Soyabean45903+
23677
69580
200%
58
Sugarcane+
Groundnut
Sugarcane+
Groundnut
45903+ 23775
69678
200%
59
Sweet Orange +
Turmeric
Sweet
Orange
39280
Turmeric
104503
144890
200%
60
Sapota+ Turmeric
Sapota
34510
Turmeric
104503
139013
200%
61
Hog Plum+
Turmeric
Hog plum
31892
Turmeric
104503
136395
200%
62
Coconut+
Turmeric
Coconut
36380
Turmeric
104503
150880
200%
Relay Cultivation:
63
Planted Amon+
Mustard
Planted
Amon (local)
26305
Mustard
3950
30255
200%
64
Planted Amon+
Grasspea
Planted
Amon (local)
26305
Grasspea
4750
31055
200%
65
Planted Amon+
Lentil
Planted
Amon (local)
26305
Lentil 5000
31305
200%
Other Crops:
66
Onion seed-
Mungbean- Planted
Amon (HYV)
Planted
Amon (HYV)
32942
Onion seed
91181
Mungbean 16164 140287
300%
67
Strawberry- Ladies
Finger-Indian
Spinach
Indian
Spinach
24440
Strawberry
146237
Ladies Finger
21673
192350
300%
68
Orange
Orange
59051
59051
100%
69
Agor
Agor 55705


55705
100%

--- Page 66 ---
61

Sl.
no.
Crop
arrangement
Kharif-2
Rabi
Kharif-1
Total
Crop
intensity
70
Apiculture
Apiculture
191600
191600
100%
71
Oil Pum
Oil Pum
41750
41750
100%
72
Gerbera
Gerbera
1838330
1838330
100%
73
Rose
Rose 509226
539220
100%
74
Gladiolus
Gladiolus
344907
344907
100%
75
Tuberose
Tuberose
98302
98302
100%
76
Marigold
Marigold
124840
114840
100%
77
Mushroom seed
production
Mushroom
seed
production
1114000
1114000
100%
78
Mushroom
production
Mushroom
production
392500
392500
100%

--- Page 67 ---
62

Annexure „H‟
Credit Norms for Crop-based Seed Production: The Fiscal Year 2014-2015
SL
No.




Name of the
Crop
Production Cost Per Acre (Tk.)
Balan
ced
Fertili
zer
Seed
Irrigati
on
Macha/
Case/
Column
Pesticide
Land
Preparat
ion
Mechan
ized/
traditio
nal
Labor
Season
Wise Rent
for crop
production
Prunnin
g Cost
Drying/Grad
ing/Cleaning
Transportati
on Cost
Seed
Refinni
ng Cost
Seed
Preserv
ation
Cost
Total
Amoun
t of
Credit
per
Acre
Amoun
t of
credit
(maxim
um)
Amount of
credit for
minimum
0.50 bigha of
land per
borrower
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Cereal Crop(HYV)
Planted Amon
(HYV)
5850
500
1200
750
3200
15000
6000
4500
7360
1000
4800
50160
50160
250800
8360
Boro (HYV)
6300
680
6000
750
3200
20000
6000
4500
7360
1000
4800
60590
60590
302590
10098
Wheat
(Irrigated)
10750
2160
2400
200
3200
12500
6000
300
7360
1000
4800
53370
53370
266850
8895
Cash Crop:(HYV)
Jute
8400
300
500
4000
12500
3000
4500
1150
200
750
35300
35300
35300
5883
Spices(HYV)
Pepper
9300
195
1200
600
4000
12500
5000
3750
575
100
375
37595
37595
37595
6265
Onion (Bulb)
9400
18250
1200
500
4800
6250
5000
3750
16150
2550
12750
80600
80600
403000
13433
Garlic
10000
24000
1200
500
4800
6250
5000
3750
9880
1560
7800
74740
74740
373700
12456
Onion (Seed)
9540
47500
2400
3000
3200
18750
6000
3750
1380
180
900
96600
96600
96600
16100
Vegetables:(HYV)
Bean
7600
660
1200
12000
600
3200
10000
5000
1500
1150
150
750
43810
43810
43810
7301
10
Red Amaranth
7350
300
600
300
3200
5000
3000
1500
460
60
300
22070
22070
22070
3678
11
Spinach
6950
128
600
300
3200
5000
3000
1500
1380
180
900
23138
23138
23138
4690
12
Bindweed
8200
135
600
300
3200
5000
3000
1500
1150
150
750
23985
23985
23985
3997
13
Bottle-guard
8500
125
600
18000
300
3200
5000
5000
1500
920
120
200
43465
43465
43465
7244
14
Radish
9500
188
1200
500
3200
5000
5000
1500
1150
150
750
28138
28138
28138
4690
15
Yard long bean
7450
1200
600
4500
500
3200
6250
5000
1500
1380
180
900
32660
32660
32660
5443
16
Brinjal
8950
100
1800
1500
3200
6250
5000
1500
230
30
150
28710
28710
28710
4785
17
Bitter Gourd
8000
1030
2400
12000
500
3200
6250
5000
1500
460
60
300
40700
40700
40700
6783
18
Ladies Finger
8500
240
1200
500
3200
5000
3000
1500
1150
150
750
25190
25190
25190
4198
19
Indian
Spinach
7700
400
1200
500
3200
6250
5000
1500
690
90
450
26980
26980
26980
4496
20
Stem
Amaranth
8100
100
600
400
3200
6250
3000
1500
460
60
300
23970
23970
23970
3995

--- Page 68 ---
63

SL
No.


Name of
the Crop
Production Cost Per Acre (Tk.)
Bal
anc
ed
Fer
tili
zer
Seed
Irrigat
ion
Mach
Case/
Colu
mn
Pestici
de
Land
Prepar
ation
Mech
anized
traditi
onal
Labor
Season
Wise
Rent for
crop
producti
on
Prunni
ng
Cost
Drying/Gr
ading/Cle
aning/
Transport
ation Cost
Seed
Refin
ning
Cost
Seed
Preser
vation
Cost
Total
Amou
nt of
Credit
per
Acre
Amou
nt of
credit
(maxi
mum)
Amount
of credit
for
minimum
0.50 bigha
of land
per
borrower
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Root Crops:(HYV)
21
Potato
(HYV)
9430
2840
1800
3000
3200
8750
5000
3750
29792
4704
23520
12134
12134
30336
20224
Oil Seeds:(HYV)
22
Mustard
(HYV)
9120
200
600
500
3200
6250
3000
3000
2024
264
1320
29478
29478
14739
4913
23
Soybean
(Rabi)
2380
210
1200
500
3200
5000
3000
3000
3220
420
2100
26120
26120
13060
4353
24
Groundnut
(Rabi)
2595
286
1200
500
3200
10000
3000
3000
1840
240
1200
29635
29635
14817
4939
25
Sunflower
9030
300
1200
500
3200
3750
3000
3000
2990
390
1950
29310
29310
29310
4885
Pulses:(HYV)
26
Mungbean
(Kharif-1)
163
720
600
500
3200
6250
3000
3000
1840
250
1200
22190
22190
11095
3698
27
Mungbean
(Rabi)
163
720
600
500
3200
6250
3000
3000
1840
250
1200
22190
22190
11095
3698
28
Blackgra
Kharip)
720
1020
600
500
3200
5000
3000
3000
1840
250
1200
20330
20330
10165
3388
29
Chickpea
171
1320
600
500
3200
5000
3000
3000
1840
250
1200
21620
21620
10810
3603
30
Lentil
221
1232
600
500
3200
6250
3000
3000
1840
250
1200
23282
23282
11641
3880
31
Grasspea
740
1000
600
500
3200
6250
3000
3000
1840
250
1200
21580
21580
10790
3596

NB: Credit Can be given to maximum 1 acre for jute, papper, onion (seed), vegetables and sunflower; to maximum 2.5 acre for potato and to maximum 5 acre for other crop
seed production.

--- Page 69 ---
64

--- Page 70 ---
65

Annexure „I‟

Credit Calendar for Crop-based Seed Production: The Fiscal Year 2014-2015



Sl
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Season
Scheduled Repay Time
Credit Disbursement
Period
Harvesting Period
Cereal Crop
Planted Amon (HYV)
1 June-30 September
1 November-31
December
1 July-31July
Boro (HYV)
15 October-15 March
1 May-30 June
1 December -31 December
Wheat (Irrigated)
1 November -15
December
31 January- 1 March
1 October -31 October
Cash Crop
Jute
15 February-30 April
15 June-15 September
15 March-15 April
Spices
Pepper
All the Year
All the Year
6 months next to harvesting
Onion (Bulb)

1 November-31
December

1 April-31 May
1 November -30 November
Garlic
1 November -31
December
1 April -31 May
1 November -30 November
Onion (Seed)
October - November
March -April
6 months next to harvesting
Vegetables
Bean
1 August-30 September
1 November -28
February
1 August -30 August
10
Red Amaranth
15 January - 15
September
1 November -28
February
1 August -30 August
11
Spinach
15 January -31
December
1 November -31 March
1 September -30 September
12
Bindweed
1 November -31
December
1 April-31 May
1 November -30 November
13
Bottle-guard
15 October -15
November
1 January -31 March
1 September -30 September
14
Radish
1 October -30 November
1 January -28 February
1 August -30 August
15
Yard long bean
15 January -14 March
14 April-15 September
15 March -15 April- (Next Year)
16
Brinjal
All the Year
All the Year
6 months next to harvesting
17
Bitter Gourd
All the Year
All the Year
6 months next to harvesting
18
Ladies Finger
All the Year
All the Year
6 months next to harvesting
19
Indian Spinach
1 February-31 March
1 April-31 May
1 November -30 November
20
Stem Amaranth
All the Year
All the Year
6 months next to harvesting
Root Crops
21
Potato (HYV)
1 September -31
December
1 February -31 March
1 August -30 August

--- Page 71 ---
66

Credit Calendar for Crop-based Seed Production: The Fiscal Year 2014-2015

Sl
No.
Name of the Crop
Production Season
Scheduled Repay Time
Credit
Disbursement
Period
Harvesting Period
Oil Seeds
22
Mustard (HYV)
1 October -30
November
15 January -31 March
1 August -30 August
23
Soybean (Rabi)
1 October -30
November
1 March 31 May
1 November -30 November
24
Groundnut (Rabi)
1 October -30
November

1 April-31 May
1 November -30 November
25
Sunflower
1 October -15
November
1 February -31 March
1 September -30 September
Pulses
26
Mungbean (Kharif-1)

1 March 15 April
13 May-1 July
1 December -31 December
27
Mungbean (Rabi)

1 October -15
November

15 December -28 February
1 August -30 August
28
Blackgram ( Kharip)
15 May-14July
15 August -15 October
15 April--15 May
29
Chickpea
15 October -30
November
15 March -30 April
15 October -15 November
30
Lentil
1 October -30
November
14 January -14 March

15 September -14 October
31
Grasspea
1 October -30
November
15 January -14 March
15 September -14 October