--- Page 1 ---
website: www.bb.org.bd

Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka-1000

03 April, 2017
BRPD Circular No- 04 Date : -----------------------




20 Chaitra, 1423

Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Prudential Regulations for Consumer Financing.

Please refer to BRPD Circular No. 07, dated November 03, 2004 and BRPD Circular No. 05,
dated April 25, 2012 on the captioned subject.

1. The consumer product market in Bangladesh has been growing rapidly over the last few years
and rising per capita income has enabled growth in consumer spending. Considering the
existing market price and the increasing demand for consumer goods, it has been decided to
make changes in Regulation-13 and Regulation-30 of Prudential Regulations for Consumer
Financing which now stand as under:

REGULATIONS FOR CREDIT CARDS
Regulation-13:

''Maximum unsecured limit under credit card to a borrower (supplementary cards shall be
considered part of the principal borrower) shall not exceed Tk. 10 (Ten) Lac. The banks may
allow financing under the credit card scheme in excess of the limit of Tk. 10 (Ten) Lac
provided the excess amount is secured against liquid securities. However, in no case the limit
will be allowed to exceed Tk. 25 (Twenty Five) Lac.

In case of foreign currency cards, cards can be issued subject to repayment is made against
respective foreign currency account or against lien of foreign currency quota allocated to
Bangladeshi nationals by Bangladesh Bank from time to time.''

REGULATIONS FOR PERSONAL LOANS INCLUDING LOANS FOR THE
PURCHASE OF CONSUMER DURABLES
Regulation 30:

"Limits per person for such loans will be Tk. 5 (Five) Lac without any securities. However,
banks may lend higher amounts provided the loans are secured appropriately. But, in no case,
the loan amount will be allowed to exceed Tk. 20 (Twenty) Lac. The loan secured against
liquid securities shall however, be exempt from this limit.''

2. Besides, Banks are instructed to provide consumer finance such a way that, in any case, the
growth rate in total loans under 'Consumer Financing' must not exceed the growth rate of
bank's total loans.

This instruction shall come into force with immediate effect.

Yours sincerely,


(Abu Farah Md. Naser)
General Manager
Phone: 9530252