--- Page 1 ---
Department of Financial Institutions & Markets
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office, Dhaka.


DFIM Circular Letter no. -01 Date : 10 January, 2008

Chief Executives/Managing Directors,
All Scheduled Banks & Financial Institutions in Bangladesh.

Dear Sir,

Regarding "Mortgaged Backed Securitization in Bangladesh: A Tentative Guideline"


Overall Bond and Securitization Market in Bangladesh has not yet flourished significantly
as thought of. Especially, the concept of "Mortgaged Backed Securities (MBS) Market"-is quite a
new. However, in recent times, many lending banks, financial institutions, housing finance
organizations and investors have started showing their interests in this sector. Anticipating the
future prospects of this sector-Bangladesh Bank, as a facilitator and coordinator, feels the
necessity to prepare an integrated policy guideline regarding this. In this context, a Focus Group
was formed under the supervision of Bangladesh Bank that included experienced officials from
different banks and financial institutions. Considering the regional experiences and world's best
practices, the group has now prepared the "Mortgaged Backed Securitization in Bangladesh: A
Tentative Guideline"- which is adaptable in Bangladesh perspective. A copy of the guideline is
forwarded herewith.

The basic concepts and applications of MBS, assessment and analysis of various risks
originating from the securitization process, future prospects of MBS in Bangladesh etc. have been
described in this guideline. A tentative MBS Structuring Model has also been incorporated in the
guideline. Since each securitization itself is unique in terms of quality and procedural
differentiation, banks and financial institutions may therefore customized their Structuring Model
depending on the requirements of the investors and Credit Rating Organizations.

Please acknowledge the receipt.












Yours Sincerely,

sd./-










(Md. Golam Mostafa)









Deputy General Manager
Phone : 7120956