--- Page 1 ---
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS DEPARTMENT
BANGLADESH BANK
HEAD OFFICE
DHAKA

FID CIRCULAR NO.01
Date : 26th May, 2004


All Non-Bank Financial Institutions
of Bangladesh

Dear Sirs ,

Credit, Bridge and Standby Facilities (CBSF)

Please refer to FID Circular No.02 dated 18.04.2000 and Circular No.15 dated 09.08.2000
related to Operational Directives of CBSF .
Clause G-1 of the Operational Directive attached as Annex-A with circular no.02 dated
18.04.2000 and Clause C-1 which was amended earlier through the circular no. 15 dated 09.08.2000
have been amended to read as follows :

OD No.and
Applicable
Agreement/Para
/Section

OPERATIONAL DIRECTIVES


G-1:
Allocation
among CBSF
Components:
FMA, APP. A
Ch.II,Para 2-5
MFA,Art.V,Sec
.5.1
From now on separate allocation for different components of the remaining
balance of CBSF shall no longer be there . In other words the remaining balance
in the Credit pool shall be available for all program purposes except the original
simple credit to participating financial institutions. Future credit for eligible
subprojects will be on a 1:1 matching basis against eligible debt issuance . In
addition , bridge financing for PFIs and/or standby repo financing for investors
remains available . The FIs can accomplish the resource mobilization objective in
two ways . The first method involves the securitization and sale of its credits or
issuance of Asset Backed Securities (ABS) . The second method is to issue the
FIs’ bonds/debentures. Resource mobilization, as defined, includes Asset backed
Securities (ABS), Collateralised Lease/Loan obligations (CLOs) covering the
securitization of outstanding and new credits and the primary issuance of bonds
or debentures. There will be a 1:1 ratio between eligible resource mobilization
and borrowing for each FI. Under this formula , a FI may use an additional US$1
of the Credit Component for every US$1 equivalent of resource mobilization ,
until the maximum of US$43 million (including US$3m of GoB funds) in Credit
is reached. All availments will be on a first come, first served basis. The Facility
Adviser and BB will consider other forms of acceptable resource mobilization in
addition to those already identified.
C-1 :
Pricing of
Credit
Component :
FMA,App.A
Ch.II, Para 2 ;
MFA,Art.V,Sec
.5.2
The interest rate on a sub-loan or lease will be fixed at the weighted average
awarded yield of Treasury Bills and Bonds of all maturities for the past three
months , plus a margin of 50 basis points , provided that the interest rate so
determined will not be less than the prevailing BB rate plus a margin of 150 basis
points.


All other directives of the Operational Directives shall remain unchanged.

Yours truly,



( Md.Yasin Ali )
General Manager
Phone : 7120362