--- Page 1 ---
Financial Institutions Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

FID Circular No. 07




Date: 13 September 2006

Managing Director/Chief Executive
All scheduled banks and non-bank Financial Institutions
in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,
Investment Promotion and Financing Facility (IPFF)

The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) has signed a Financing Agreement (FA) for
SDR 34.9 million on 01 June 2006 with the International Development Association (IDA) in
connection with implementation of the Investment Promotion and Financing Facility (IPFF)
Project. The important objective of the project is to promote the infrastructure development
through private sector entrepreneurs endorsed by the GoB. The GoB and Bangladesh Bank
have signed an Administrative Agreement on 21 August 2006 empowering Bangladesh Bank
to administer and implement the project on behalf of GoB.

02. “Infrastructure Development Lending” is the main component of the project. It
will supplement the resources of local financial markets to provide long-term finance for
infrastructure projects beyond the capacity of the local financial institutions. This component
will provide a funding mechanism that will add transparent levels of control and market-based
incentives to the existing methodology for allocating funds to priority infrastructure projects
(will be recognized as investment projects) identified by government and developed on the
basis of public-private partnerships. The GoB will also provide co-financing to the Facility.
Bangladesh Bank will hire a technical advisory firm and consultants for operational support of
the Facility.

03. The Facility will provide long-term financing to eligible financial institutions
(banks and non-banks) while those financial institutions will finance the infrastructure project
promoters. The Operational Directives that will govern the operation and implementation
procedures and eligibility criteria of the financial institutions are attached in Annexure-A.
Interested banks and non-bank financial institutions may apply for eligibility of the Facility.

This circular takes immediate effect.

Yours faithfully,

Sd/=

(Md. Mofiz Uddin Chowdhury)
General Manager
Phone: 7120362

--- Page 2 ---
Annexure-A




OPERATIONAL DIRECTIVES

FOR

INVESTMENT PROMOTION AND FINANCING
FACILITY















INVESTMENT PROMOTION AND FINANCING
FACILITY (IPFF) PROJECT
IDA CREDIT # 4169-BD
BANGLADESH BANK
HEAD OFFICE
DHAKA

--- Page 3 ---
Annexure-A

OPERATIONAL DIRECTIVES

1.Introduction

The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) has signed a Financing Agreement (FA) for SDR 34.9
million (approximately US$50 million equivalent) with the International Development
Association (IDA) in connection with the Investment Promotion and Financing Facility (IPFF)
Project. The important objective of the project is to promote infrastructure development through
private sector entrepreneurs endorsed by the GoB.

" Infrastructure Development Lending" is the main component of the project. It will supplement
the resources of Bangladesh's financial markets to provide long-term finance for infrastructure
projects beyond the capacity of local financial institutions. This component will provide a
funding mechanism that will add transparent levels of control and market-based incentives to the
existing methodology for allocating funds to priority infrastructure projects (recognized as
Investment Projects) identified by government and developed on the basis of public-private
partnerships. The IDA board has approved the SDR equivalent of US$ 50 million; GoB will also
provide approximately US$ 10 million to the project out of which a total of approximately US$
57.50 million will be available as Facility Loan.


2.Background of OD


These Operational Directives (“OD”) contain the basic policies and procedures governing
the operations of the Investment Promotion and Financing Facility (“IPFF” ). Bangladesh Bank
(“BB”) will administer the Facility as the implementing agency on behalf of GoB. Since these
OD contain principles and guidelines that govern the IPFF operations, they take precedence over
the other agreements, as follows: the Master Facility Agreement (“MFA”) between the IPFF and
the participating financial institutions (“PFIs”) under the Project, and the Facility Access
Agreements that cover the access by the PFIs to the IPFF credit. These OD provide specific
guidelines for the IPFF to enable it to faithfully carry out its responsibilities. While the OD spell
out specific guidelines, there are areas where the executing agency is encouraged to exercise its
professional judgement to help attain the objectives of the Project.

3. Amendments to the Operational Directives


The BB, with the written consent of the IDA, may amend provisions of these OD from
time to time. The IDA may indicate its consent to amendments through the Aide Memoire of
any of its missions or a letter from its Management.

--- Page 4 ---
OD No. and Applicable
Agreement/Para/
Section

OPERATIONAL DIRECTIVES
Financing Agreement
Article II, Sec,2.01
The total allocated amount for this Facility Loan ("Facility Loans"
means any loan provided by Bangladesh Bank to PFIs) will be
approximately US$ 57.5m. All availments to PFIs will be on a first
come, first serve basis.
Financing Agreement
schedule 4 , Sec. E para
Facility Loans shall be denominated in Taka; and, with prior approval of
the GoB and the IDA, may be denominated in dollars.
Equity Participation:
Maximum Amount per
Investment loan
Refers page 6 of OD
Projects will be supported on market terms and will require at least a
30% equity from the private infrastructure promoter. Out of the balance
70%, PFIs and/or other institutions will finance atleast 20% and the rest
may be financed by IPFF.

a. The grace period for Investment Loans ("Investment Loan" means a
loan made by or proposed to be made by a PFI out of the proceeds
of the facility for financing Investment Projects) will be of a
maximum of 10 years with a minimum of 3 years from the first
disbursement of the Facility Loan.

b. The maximum repayment period for Investment Loans will be 20
years from the first disbursement for an Investment Loan.
c. The PFI will not extend grace and repayment periods longer than
what is prudently needed by the Investment Project .
Grace and Repayment
Periods:
Financing Agreement
Schedule V
d. A consolidated amortisation schedule for availments under the
facility, by way of Investment loans , will be prepared prior to the first
disbursement. This consolidated amortisation schedule will be revised at
the closing of the Investment loan to reflect the actual disbursement.

--- Page 5 ---
Continuing Eligibility:
MFA Art.III,Sec3.1 and






Compliance
and
continuing Eligibility:
MFA Art. III , Sec. 3.2
(a)The PFI will be required to meet the eligibility criteria for continued
participation in the Facility, as modified from time to time.
(b) The FI may not be associated with corrupt and unethical business
activities or practices inconsistent with the Investment Project pursuant
to the IDA Procurement Guidelines.

a. After receiving approval to participate in the Facility, the PFI
must continue to satisfy the eligibility criteria referred to above
in Sec3.1 of MFA
b. If the PFI is not in compliance with any of the eligibility criteria,
the IPFF will promptly notify to the PFI that identifies the
specific eligibility criteria which the PFI is not in compliance
and seeks appropriate response from the PFI to remedy the
violation within a stated agreed upon time period.
c. If the PFI fails to maintain its eligibility status under the Facility,
the IPFF with intimation to IDA , will have the right to suspend
all Investment loans amortizations under the Facility in respect
of the FI.
d. The IPFF may re-establish the eligibility status of the PFI upon
demonstrated compliance by the PFI that the specific eligibility
violations have been removed, mitigated or no longer exists.

--- Page 6 ---
Pricing of Credit :
MFA, Art.v, Sec. 5.2

Financing
Agreement
Schedule
iv.
Sec.E.4
(b),(c).
a) The interest rate on Facility Loan shall be standardized across
participating financial institutions. The grace period and amortization
schedule shall match that of investment loans extended by participating
financial institutions.

b)The Facility Loan interest rates shall be on the basis of a margin of
over the marketable government borrowing instrument with maturity
closest to the interest resetting mechanism of the loan. The interest rate
for a fixed rate bullet loan shall be set at 0.25 percent above the
equivalent maturity government bond rate. The interest rate for a fixed
rate amortizing loan shall be set at 0.25 percent above the rate of the
government bond having a maturity closest to the average life of the
loan. The interest for a floating rate loan shall be set at 0.50 percent
above the interest rate of the recipient's Treasury Bill maturing closest to
the interest reset date of the loan. Interest rates for the Government
securities to be used as reference rates for Taka Facility Loans shall be
as disclosed on the Bangladesh Bank web page.

c) For any Facility Loans made to the PFI in Dollars, or any other
convertible currency, the interest rate will be 0.50 percent above the
relevant inter bank rate for floating rate loans (interest rates resetting
every 12 months or less) and 0.25 percent above the relevant swap rate
for fixed rate loans, as determined by the International Swaps and
Derivatives Association (ISDAFIX)

--- Page 7 ---
Credit Files to
be maintained: MFA,
Art. iv, Sec. 4.2
PFIs should maintain for each Investment Enterprise and the
corresponding Investment project the following files, as a minimum:

(a) Executive summary of the Investment Project and client profile.
(b) Principal amount, maturity, interest rates, payment dates, scheduled
payment amounts, grace periods, prepayment date(s), prepayment
premium, if any, outstanding balances, cash surplus balances, if any,
and other pertinent details of the Investment loan.
(c) Description of the product(s), sub-sector, project description, project
costs, financial plan, and use of loan proceeds.
(d) Collateral or security, special conditions, and covenants.
(e) Description of principal owners or senior management of the
Investment Enterprise.
(f) Copies of PFI’s internal credit evaluation report, credit information
bureau reports, and internal memoranda of the PFI to the PFI board
or management/credit committee recommending approval.
(g) Minutes documenting board or management approval and the
conditions for approval.
(h) Copies of the Investment Loan, collateral or security documents
(originals in safekeeping), documents evidencing authority of client
and signatories to enter into the Investment loan agreement, and
documents evidencing compliance with pre-disbursement conditions
(including verification of collateral papers and payment of security
deposit for loans).
(i) Record
of
disbursements,
collections,
arrears,
outstanding
receivables, and reports on construction, installation, completion,
production and operations.


(j) Documents in support of syndication copies of regular financial
statements, periodic reports on credit classification and provisions
for loan losses/contingencies, late payment notices, demand letters,
foreclosure or similar notices,
client correspondence, documents relating to restructuring,
foreclosures, repossession, bankruptcy, and all other material
information on the credit account.

(k) Record of supervision of Investment Projects.
(l) Supporting documents in respect of sponsor's equity.

--- Page 8 ---
4.Selection of Investment Project

Infrastructure Projects from the power sector will be given special emphasis, however under the
Guidelines, infrastructure projects from the following sectors or sub sectors may be implemented
as Private Infrastructure Projects:
a) power generation, transmission, distribution, and services
b) port development( sea, river and land) including inland container terminals, inland
container depot and other services;
c) environmental, industrial and solid waste management projects
d) highways and expressways including mass-transit , bridges, tunnels, flyovers,
interchanges, city roads, bus terminals, commercial car parking, etc;
e) airports, terminals and related aviation facilities;
f) water supply and distribution, sewerage and drainage;
g) industrial estates and parks development;



5. Facility Mechanisms.

a. A private sector promoter is selected to undertake a government-sponsored infrastructure
investment project on the basis of a PPP (for example a land port or a small power plant).
b. The promoter approaches a participating financial institution to finance the investment
project.
c. The selected participating financial institution conducts due diligence on the proposed
investment project.
d. If satisfied with the proposed project, the participating financial institution decides to co
finance the project and determines the applicable interest rate.
e. The financial institution then approaches BB with the proposed project and requests co
financing under the IPFF.
f. The Technical Advisor/Consultants appointed by Bangladesh Bank reviews the proposed
investment project and provides its advice also to IDA. On the basis of its own
assessment for adherence to project objectives, the Financing Agreement and government
policies, IDA will also review on the basis of "No Objection".
g. On behalf of the GoB, BB provides the requested funding to the participating Financial
Institution in local currency or US dollars, as required. In parallel, the PFIs and other
financial institution provide their shares of the financing to the project. Investment Loans
to ,PFIs for Investment Projects eligible for financing from the Facility will be approved
by the Bangladesh Bank as agent of GoB subject to IDA " No objection".
h. Projects will be supported on market terms and will require at least 30% equity from the
private infrastructure promoter. Out of the balance of up to 70%, PFIs (alone or through
syndication) will finance 20% and rest may be financed by IPFF.
i. The PFIs are required to co-invest as well as assume all credit risk to reinforce alignment
of their interests and those of the government.
j. Syndication amongst PFIs and with non participating institutions will be permitted but
the PFIs will be responsible for credit administration and recovery.

--- Page 9 ---
k. Participation under the facility will be open to all financial institutions that meet
eligibility criteria to be determined by BB (See annexure 1). Approvals provided by BB
will be on the basis of the fulfilment of technical criteria contained in a checklist
(Annexure 3).
l. All PFIs participating in the financing must demonstrate to the satisfaction of Bangladesh
Bank that they will remain in conformity with Bangladesh Bank regulations, including
those relating to capital adequacy, single borrower exposure and provisioning.
m. Technical Advisor/Consultant also provides support in designing and managing capacity-
building programs, especially with regard to the respective agencies' role in policy
making for private participation and as overseer of private Build, Operate,
Transfer/Build, Own, Operate (BOT/BOO) and other forms of PPP contracts. The project
will also support initiatives such as the design of institution strengthening programs that
focus on regulation in general, and promotion of regulatory reforms aimed at attracting
more private investment in infrastructure.
n. To reduce risks to investors and promote adherence to national and World Bank
requirements, Technical Advisor or Consultant will coordinate and oversee the provision
of social and environment assessment services to project sponsors.

a. Screening of investment concepts against the IFC/Multilateral Investment
Guaranty Agency exclusion list to ensure that no activities on the exclusion list
are financed (See Annex 4).
b. Determination of appropriate safeguard categories under both DOE and World
Bank classification
c. Contracting for and reviewing environmental and social impact assessments as
required by DOE and the World Bank.
d. Submitting draft impact assessments for environmental Category A projects with
significant adverse social impacts for review and " No Objection " by the World
Bank before seeking clearance from DOE.
e. Obtaining environmental clearance for all proposed investments from DOE
f. Providing the World Bank with annual monitoring reports summarizing all
investments, their safeguard category, and impact assessment / Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) status.
o. Investment Projects will be required to submit their procurement plan along with the
proposal.

p. To improve the standard of project preparation in Bangladesh, funds under the technical
assistance component may be used to supervise and manage the preparation of
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) to assure the quality required by the GoB (and
for eligibility for World Bank Group funding).

q. The Department of Environment is responsible for providing environmental clearances
according to the requirements of the Environmental Conservation Act Rules of 1995 and
1997.

--- Page 10 ---
6. The above facility mechanism is shown in a diagram in Annexure2.




7. Approval of financing proposals

Once a PFI has taken the decision to finance an infrastructure project following the above
mechanism, the PFI will forward the loan file to Bangladesh Bank for approval of the requested
IPFF co-financing (maximum 80% of the debt). Bangladesh Bank will do the initial scrutiny as
per the checklist and will forward the proposal to the Technical Advisor/Consultant. Technical
advisor/consultant will provide technical assistance to Bangladesh Bank during this review
process. Upon receipt proposal from Bangladesh Bank, Technical Advisor/Consultants will
review whether the investment projects to be financed meet pre-defined criteria: acceptable
procurement, sufficient equity participation (minimum 30%), completion of EIA, etc. Once
Bangladesh Bank has ensured that the investment project complies with the eligibility criteria; it
will forward the loan application to IDA for no-objection. After receiving IDA's clearance
regarding the loan application, the Project Director will sanction the loan amount, which will be
disbursed in three instalments. The first instalment amount will be 45%, second 30% and the
third instalment will be 25% of the sanctioned amount. Prior inspections will necessarily be
required to become eligible to avail the second and third instalment. Similar inspection to judge
the proper utilization of the second instalment will be regarded as the eligibility of availing the
third and final. The PFIs should ensure the 30% equity participation of the entrepreneurs along
with the PFI's own participation.


Eligible investment projects will be considered for financing by Bangladesh Bank on a first
come, first serve basis. However, eligible power sector projects will be given special emphasis.
Applications incomplete in any respect will fall back in the queue and will be overtaken by other
complete applications in the disbursement process.


8. Selection of PFIs
Bangladesh Bank will have the responsibility for selecting the PFIs, deciding whether to finance
the loan proposals submitted by the PFIs, based on a list of pre-determined criteria and providing
capacity building to financial institutions in infrastructure finance and related themes, eligibility
criteria (Annexure 1) will be followed to select PFIs under IPFF. IPFF is open to both bank and
non-bank financial institutions.

--- Page 11 ---
9. Procedures to be followed by entrepreneurs


A private sector promoter wishing to access financing under the facility, shall follow the
following procedures:
a) The private sector promoter shall have received a Letter of Intent from Government in
connection with a government-sponsored infrastructure investment project or shall have
prepared a proposal for a private infrastructure project of a type identified by
Government as eligible for financing under the Facility (e.g. a captive power plant)
b) The private sector promoter shall provide evidence of ability to provide an equity
contribution to the development of the proposed investment project for a minimum of
30% of the total investment project cost.
c) the promoter shall have received a credit approval for the investment project from a PFI
d) The promoter shall have obtained appropriate clearance from the Department of the
Environment.

A PFI, or consortium of PFIs, wishing to access financing under the Facility, shall follow the
following procedures:

a) Demonstrate as required to Bangladesh Bank that private sector promoter has followed
all required steps as identified above.
b) Provide evidence to the satisfaction of Bangladesh Bank that all PFIs participating in the
financing remain in conformity with the eligibility criteria for project participation (as
detailed in annexure 1)
c) show evidence of capacity to finance 20% of the total loan amount through resources
other than drawing upon the facility ( which may be from own resources or other sources,
including financial institutions not participating in the facility).
d) demonstrate to the satisfaction of Bangladesh Bank that all PFIs participating in the
financing will remain in conformity with all Bangladesh Bank regulations, including
those relating to capital adequacy, single borrower exposure and provisioning.




10. Other terms and conditions for Investment Loans:

1. Unless otherwise agreed by the GoB, Bangladesh Bank and the Association shall
otherwise agree, Investment Loans shall be denominated in Taka.
2. The interest rate on Investment Loans shall be determined by the respective PFI in
accordance with its usual lending practices.
3. Investment Loans shall be repaid over a period of time not exceeding 20 years
determined by the respective PFI in accordance with its usual lending practices.
4. The amortization schedule applicable to each Investment Loan financed out of the
proceeds of an Investment Loan shall conform to the amortization schedule of the
applicable Investment Loan.
5. No expenditures for goods or services required for an Investment Project shall be
eligible for Financing out of the proceeds of the Credit unless:

--- Page 12 ---
10

a) the Investment Loan for such Investment Project shall have been approved by
the Association and such expenditures shall have been made not earlier than
120 days prior to the date on which the Association shall have received in
respect of such Investment Loan the application and information required
under paragraph 6 (a) of schedule-v of the Financing Agreement in respect of
such Investment Loan; or
b) the Investment Loan for such Investment project shall have been an
Investment Loan for which the Association has authorized withdrawals from
the Credit Account without prior approval by the Association and such
expenditures shall have been made not earlier than 120 days prior to the date
on which the Association shall have received the request and information
required under paragraph 7(b) of the Financing Agreement Schedule in
respect of such Investment Loan.



6. (a) When presenting an Investment Loan to The Association for approval, the GoB
shall cause Bangladesh Bank to forward to the Association an application submitted
by a PFI, in form satisfactory to the Association, together with: (i) a description of the
Investment Enterprise and an appraisal of the Investment Project, including a
description of the expenditures proposed to be financed out of the proceeds of the
credit; (ii) the proposed terms and conditions of the Investment Loan, including the
schedule of amortization of the Investment Loan; and (iii) such other information as
the Association shall reasonably request.

(b) Each request by the GoB for authorization to make withdrawals from the Credit
Account in respect of an Investment Loan for which prior approval by the
Association is not required shall contain: (i) a summary description of the Investment
Enterprise and the Investment Project, including a description of the probable
environmental impact and of the expenditures proposed to be financed out of the
proceeds of the credit, (ii) the terms and conditions of the Investment loan, including
the schedule of the amortization therefore; (iii) the description of mechanism
designed to ensure that all environmental and social safeguards matters have been
addressed, consistently with the EIA and the EMP; (iv) a certification that the
carrying out of the Investment Project (A) does not involve involuntary resettlement
of People, and (B) will not be located inside a protected area; and (v) evidence that
the Investment Enterprise owns the land where the Investment Project will be
developed.

(c) the PFIs or project sponsors may take assistance from the Technical
Advisor/Consultant for EIA or to remove any difficulty before or during execution of
the Investment project.

--- Page 13 ---
11
(d) All Investment Loans by a PFI shall be subject to Prior approval by the
Association. However, Investment Loans by such PFI may be exempted from prior
approval as the Association shall agree.
(e) Applications and requests made pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs (a) and
(b) of this Section shall be presented to The Association within 30 days upon
receiving positive comments on the eligibility review and EIA.
(f) Applications and requests made pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) of
this Section shall also include evidence that the Investment Project proposed to be financed
out of the proceeds of the Investment Loan does not include activities of a military or
paramilitary nature or activities in the following SITC groups or subgroups, or any success or
groups or subgroups under future revisions to the SITC, as designated by the Association by
notice to the GOB.

Group





Description of Items

112
Alcholic beverages

121
Tobacco, unmanufactured, tobacco refuse


122
Tobacco, manufactured (whether or not
containing tobacco substitutes)

525
Radioactive and associated materials

667
Pearls, precious and semi-precious stones,
unworked or worked

718
Nuclear reactors,and parts thereof, fuel
elements (cartridges),non-irradiated for
nuclear reactors
728.43
Tobacco processing machinery

897
Jewelry of gold, silver or platinum group
metals (except watches and watch cases)
and goldsmiths" or silversmiths" wares
(including set gems)

971
Gold, non-monetary (excluding gold ores and
concentrates)

To improve the standard of project preparation in Bangladesh, funds under the technical
assistance component may be used to supervise and manage the preparation of Environmental
Impact Assessments (EIA) to assure the quality required by the GoB (and for eligibility for
World Bank Group funding).

--- Page 14 ---
12
The Department of Environment is responsible for providing environmental clearances according
to the requirements of the Environmental Conservation Act Rules of 1995 and 1997.




11. Undertakings of the PFI


Except as the BB will otherwise agree:

1.The PFI will conduct its operations and affairs in accordance with sound financial standards
and accounting and auditing practices, with qualified and experienced management and in
accordance with its (i) Articles of Association, (ii) Statement of Lending Policy, and (iii)
Corporate Strategy Statement, as approved by its Board of Directors and a three-year business
plan for term lending, satisfactory to the association.

2.The PFI will establish and maintain procedures and operational policies, satisfactory to the
BB and IDA, for the appraisal, supervision and monitoring of Facility Loans and Investment
Loans.

3.The PFI shall, unless the Bangladesh Bank, The GoB and the Association shall otherwise
agree, ensure that Investment Loans will be made in accordance with the procedures and on the
terms and conditions set forth to in Schedule 5 of Financing Agreement.

4.The PFI will exercise its rights in relation to each Investment project in such manner as to (i)
protect the interests of BB, the GoB, the Association, and of the PFI; (ii) comply with its
obligations under the Master Facility Agreement; and (iii) achieve the purposes of the Facility.

5.The PFI shall duly perform all its obligations under the Master Facility Agreement. Except as
the Bangladesh Bank, the GoB and the association shall otherwise agree, the PFI shall not take or
concur in any action which would have the effect of assigning, amending, abrogating or waiving
the Master Facility Agreement or any provision thereof.


6.The PFI will require that: (i) the goods and services to be financed out of the proceeds of the
credit shall be procured in accordance with established commercial practices and procedures
satisfactory to the Association; and (ii) such goods and services shall be used exclusively in the
carrying out of the Investment Project;

7. The PFI shall require the Investment Enterprise to annually carry out the audit of the
Investment Project under terms of reference satisfactory to the PFI;
8. The PFI shall inspect, by itself or jointly with representatives of the Association if the
Association shall so request, such goods and the sites, works, plants and construction included in
the Investment Project, the operation thereof, and any relevant records and documents;

--- Page 15 ---
13
9. The PFI shall require that: (i) the Investment Enterprise shall take out and maintain with
responsible insurers such insurance, against such risks and in such amounts, as shall be
consistent with sound business practice; and (ii) without any limitation upon the foregoing, such
insurance shall cover hazards incident to the acquisition, transportation and delivery of goods
financed out of the proceeds of the Credit to the place of use or installation, any indemnity there
under to be made payable in a currency freely usable by the Investment Enterprise to replace or
repair such goods.

10. The PFI shall obtain all such information as the GOB, the Association or the PFI shall
reasonably request relating to the foregoing and to the administration, operation and financial
condition of the Investment Enterprise and to the benefits to be derived from the Investment
Project; and

11. The PFI shall suspend or terminate the right of the Investment Enterprise to the use of the
proceeds of the Credit upon failure by such Investment Enterprise to perform its obligations
under its contract with the PFI.

12.The PFI will, at the request of the BB, exchange views with the BB with regard to the
performance of its obligations under the Master Facility client and other matters relating to the
purposes of the Credit.

13.The PFI will promptly inform the GOB and Bangladesh Bank of any condition that interferes
or threatens to interfere with the accomplishment of the purposes of the Credit or the
performance of the PFI of its obligations under the Master Facility Agreement.

14.The PFI shall maintain procedures and records adequate to monitor and record the progress of
each Investment Project (including the cost and the benefits to be derived from it) and to reflect
in accordance with consistently maintained sound accounting practices the operations and
financial condition of the PFI.

15.The PFI shall enter into Facility Access Agreements with Bangladesh Bank for receiving
Facility Loans

16.Facility Loans shall be disbursed to PFIs against Investment Loans made by PFIs to finance
Investment Projects

17.The right of PFIs to use the proceeds of Facility Loans shall be suspended or terminated upon
the suspension or termination of the related Investment Loans for the relevant Investment
Project.

18.The PFIs are to ensure their due diligence in all environmental and social safeguards matters,
inter alia, in:

a) Ensuring that required clearances of environmental and social impact assessments have been
obtained from DOE and the Association;

--- Page 16 ---
14
b) Ensuring that all EMPs, as cleared by DOE and the Association, are incorporated in the
investment contract documentation; and
c) Providing Bangladesh Bank, the GOB and the Association with annual reporting of all
investments, their safeguard category and clearances, and any environmental or social
commitments (such as EMPs) that have been incorporated in investment contracts.




Terms as per Facility Access Agreement

1. The Facility Loan shall be utilized by the PFI to provide an Investment Loan for the
purpose of financing an Investment Project.
2. The PFI shall, unless the GoB, Bangladesh Bank and the Association otherwise agree,
ensure that Investment Loans will be made in accordance with procedures and on the
terms and conditions set forth or referred to in Schedule V to the Financing Agreement.
3. In respect of the Facility Loan, the PFI shall comply with all its relevant obligations set
out in the Master Facility Agreement
4. The PFI shall annually carry out the audit of the Facility Loan under terms of reference
satisfactory to the Bangladesh Bank.




12.Terms and conditions of Facility Loans

1. Facility Loans shall be denominated in Taka; and, with prior approval of
the GOB and the Association, may be denominated in dollars or other
convertible currency.
2. Facility Loans shall be repaid over a period equivalent to the repayment
period of the Investment Loans against which the Facility Loans are
disbursed.
3. The eligibility criteria and the procedures are spelled out clearly.
4. The interest rate shall be as follows:
a) Standardized across PFIs. The grace period and amortization schedule
shall match that of Investment Loans extended by PFIs.
b) Facility Loan interest rates shall be on the basis of a margin over the
marketable government borrowing instrument with maturity closest to
the interest resetting mechanism of the loan. The interest rate for a
fixed rate bullet loan shall be set at 0.25 percent above the equivalent
maturity government bond rate. The interest rate for a fixed rate
amortizing loan shall be set at 0.25 percent above the rate of the
government bond having maturity closest to the average life of the
loan. The interest for a floating rate loan shall be set at 0.50percent
above the interest rate of the GOB's Treasury Bill maturing closest to
the interest rate reset date of the loan. Interest rates for the government

--- Page 17 ---
15
securities to be used as reference rates for Taka Facility Loans shall be
as disclosed on the Bangladesh Bank's webpage.
c) For any Facility Loans made to PFI in dollars, or any other convertible
currency, the interest rate will be 0.50 percent above the relevant inter
bank rate for floating rate loans (interest rates resetting every 12
months or less) and 0.25 percent above the relevant swap rate for fixed
rate loans, as determined by the International Swaps and Derivatives
Association (ISDAFIX).



13. Procurement

Selection of entrepreneur/ concessionaire of infrastructure Investment Projects obtaining
financing from the Facility, and procurement of goods and works by these entrepreneurs/
concessionaires:

The following four cases will apply:
• A government executing agency (e.g. Ministry of Communications, REB, BPDB,
etc) selects a concessionaire/entrepreneur competitively under a concession, BOT
or similar arrangement. In this case, the process will follow the general principles
laid out in section 3.13(a) of the Procurement Guidelines (Annexure 5).

• A government executing agency (e.g. Ministry of Communications, REB, BPDB,
etc) selects an concessionaire/entrepreneur under a concession, BOT or similar
arrangement, but not under ICB procedures acceptable by IDA. In such cases, for
procurement of goods, works and services by the concessionaire/entrepreneur
required for the Investment Project and financed by IDA, shall be done in
congruence with Section 3.13 (b) of Procurement Guidelines (Annexure 5).

• Only under rare specific circumstances where a competitive process is not
possible or practical such as in the case of expansion of an existing investment
project operated by incumbent concessionaires or entrepreneurs, provisions of
Section 3.13(a) and 3.13(b) of the Procurement Guidelines would apply subject to
the following:

I. the incumbent concessionaire/entrepreneur shall be a private company or a
government-owned company satisfying the requirements of paragraph 1.8(c)
of the Procurement Guidelines; (See annexure 5)
II. procurement capacity of the concessionaire/entrepreneur is assessed at the
level acceptable to the Association;
III. the procurement procedures of the concessionaire/entrepreneur results in fair
competition, economy, efficiency and transparency; and

--- Page 18 ---
16
IV. no
preference
is
given
to
contractors
belonging
to
the
concessionaire/entrepreneurs' shareholders.

• A private infrastructure service provider approaches a PFI to obtain financing
for an investment project that is not under a concession, BOT or similar
arrangement, but in which a public interest can be demonstrated. This could
apply only in rare cases where concessionaire/entrepreneur has not been
selected by public tender, but where the government allows unlimited entry
into the market through an open licensing process, subject only to fulfilment of
technical quality requirements. As the case may be, funds of the facility may
be provided to the eligible PFI to be re-lent to the concessionaire/entrepreneur
in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3.12 of the Procurement
Guidelines, by which infrastructure concessionaire/entrepreneur could
undertake procurement in accordance with established private sector or
commercial practices, acceptable to IDA.





14. Monitoring and Reporting


Bangladesh Bank will be required to ensure that the PFIs will

a) comply with the reporting and monitoring requirements as prescribed by IDA
b) verify the status of Investment Projects supported under the IPFF by on-site
inspection at least semi-annually
c) prepare Investment Loan portfolio management and progress reports covering
outstanding loans under the Credit to be submitted to BB and IDA within thirty
days of each semester end.
d) Participating FIs will submit annual audit reports to BB and IDA within four
months of the end of the year.
e) Each PFI will maintain a separate database system with adequate backups
regarding IPFF loans or leases.

--- Page 19 ---
17




15. Repayment Mechanism


• Once the repayment schedule is prepared each PFI is required to pay on due
date the full amount to be paid by cheque
• Value date for repayment received is the date the cheque is handed over to
BB.
• BB will monitor the total repayment system
• At the end of the day, if there are any non-payments, the PFI is contacted
and reminded that the repayment has been missed out.
• Late payments are subject to penalties at the same rate at which
disbursement is made against the funding
• If the repayment date happens to be a holiday, the repayment is payable on
the next working day without penalties.
• Pre-payments are allowed without penal interest
• In case of partial pre-payment, repayment schedules are redrawn, and the
new repayment schedule is entered into the system
• Each PFI should maintain a database regarding their repayment due dates
and monitor properly

--- Page 20 ---
18



Annexure 1

A GUIDE TO ASSESSING
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR FINANCIAL INTERMIDIARIES (FIs) FOR THE
INVESTMENT PROMOTION & FINANCING FACILITY (IPFF) PROJECT
Notes:
(1) An application for joining IPFF should include the following documents:
Full set of worked-out criteria based on the latest year-end / half-yearly audited accounts
Detail workings in support of the results such as calculations, schedules, etc.
Other documents as specified below.
(2) The workings have to be certified by the auditors.
(3) Accounts should be completed using the Finance Method of accounting (IAS 17).
(4) To determine eligibility of PFIs under IPFF, BB will consider the totality of the eligibility criteria in a manner
that will establish acceptable quality of
a) management,
b) profitable and sustainable operations,
c) appropriate capacity (including staffing for carrying out subproject appraisal with environmental assessment
and for supervising subproject implementation). Under special circumstances post-funding monitoring may be
done,
d) capacity to mobilize domestic resources,
e) adequate managerial autonomy and commercially oriented governance (particularly relevant when state-
owned or state-controlled FIs are involved),
f)appropriate prudential policies, administrative structure and business procedures and ,
g) sound financial position.
(5) In consultation with IDA, BB may waive compliance with a particular eligibility criterion in exceptional cases.
However, in those cases, the PFI would have to show improvement.
(6) Foreign Banks, operating in Bangladesh, will not be eligible to apply for 100% credit under the
proposed project. However they can participate in syndication funding up to 49% of the total
exposure of single credit.

The eligibility criteria for the proposed IPFF have been prepared in line with the criteria mentioned in
OP 8-30 of the World Bank.

Criterion 1: Compliance with relevant and prudential regulations of Bangladesh

The PFI must hold a valid license from Bangladesh Bank to operate as a bank or NBFI. In case of
institutions also operating as a merchant bank, must have a valid license from SEC.

Please include company details such as -
Date of incorporation
Date of receiving License from BB / other regulatory bodies
Date of commencement of business
Legal status (Private / Public)
Date of IPO
Date of listing on stock exchanges (DSE & CSE)
List of directors along with shareholdings

--- Page 21 ---
19
Criterion 2: Adequacy of provisions

Requirement:
The PFI has to compare the amount of provision required by BB regulations and the amount of
provision made by the PFI.


Noted Points:
The PFI has to show the breakdown of the above two amounts, that is, how they were calculated.


The portfolio amount, on which the provision calculations are based, should be consistent with
the portfolio amount used elsewhere - compare criteria 9 & 14. If there is a difference among the
portfolio figures used in these three criteria, explanation and supporting calculations should be
provided.

Portfolio Calculation:

The total portfolio amount should include the following (if applicable) –
Lease receivables (including the current portion and not net of provision amount)
Term finance (including the current portion and not net of provision amount)
Short-term finances
Equity investments
Receivables against bill discounting
Advances against lease finance and term finance
Others

Criterion 3: Positive rate of real return

Defined as:
(net earning after tax for the period / average stockholders’ equity) x 100


1 + the inflation rate [in decimal form]
Noted Points:
The average stockholders’ equity calculation should exclude any dividend amount paid or
proposed to be paid within 6 months of year-end.
This criterion needs to show the real rate of return. The year-end inflation rate to be used is
provided in BB publications, such as Economic Trend.

Criterion 4: Capital adequacy ratio

Applicable for banks only. The commercial banks must show the detailed calculation of risk-weighted assets and breakdown of total capital.
IPFF expects the minimum capital adequacy ratio to be 9%.

Criterion 5: Debt / Equity Ratio

IPFF expects the ratio to be maximum of 10 times for PFIs operating for at least 5 years and 5 times for
PFIs operating for less than 5 years (but not less than 3 years).

Debt / equity ratio =
Long term monetary liabilities at the end of a period





Shareholders’ equity at the end of the same period

--- Page 22 ---
20
Monetary liabilities would include all the outstanding components including the current
portions.The maximum debt / equity ratio under Bank projects would not normally
exceed 10 times, with a lower ceiling of FIs with a relatively shorter track record.


Noted Points:
The PFIs must consider lease advances, lease deposits, term deposits as liabilities.
Non-monetary liabilities such as deferred liabilities should be excluded.
Current liabilities such as payable and accrued expenses should not be included.

Criterion 6: Comparison between the weighted average life of monetary liabilities with weighted
average life of credits

IPFF expects that the weighted average life of monetary liabilities should at least be longer than the
weighted average life of credits.
Noted Points:
The PFIs have to show the comparison between weighted average life of monetary liabilities and
weighted average life of credits.
Monetary liabilities should include all long and short-term sources of funds such as bank loans -
including funds from the call-money market, deposits, advances, overdraft, etc. (but not
shareholders’ equity). Non-monetary liabilities should not be included.
Credits should include total credit, advance and investment portfolio.
The calculation should be based on actual term of the lease / loan / credit line and principal
outstanding amount of lease / loan / credit line.
In case of deterioration of the situation compared to the previous year, the PFIs would have to provide
explanation and specify the mitigating factors.


Criterion 7: Mismatched foreign currency position

Only applicable for PFIs dealing in foreign currency. The “long” and “short” foreign currency position at
the end of the period should not exceed the stated ratio in relation to stockholders’ equity at the end of the
same period. The “long” and “short” position should be computed for both the total foreign currency
position and the cross currency positions, and the resulting ratios should not exceed 5% of equity.

Noted Point:
The IPFF will accept calculations using total equity, but this should not include proposed/paid
dividends as per criterion 3.

Criterion 8: Collection ratio

IPFF expects ratio to be minimum of 80%.

Computed as: Total cash collections from on balance sheet term credits for a period


Total receivables from on balance sheet credits for the same period

“Total cash collections”
(a) include current cash collection, i.e.
(i) cash collections from receivables due during the period, and
(ii) cash collections on past due receivables,

--- Page 23 ---
21
(b) but exclude rescheduling.

“Total receivables” exclude term credits, which are in litigation.
Noted Points:
The PFIs should show detail calculation regarding derivation of the key figures.
The PFIs should use the actual figures rather than the figures provided in the annual accounts -
which are sometimes different due to various accounting treatments that might be applied. In the
event that the figures differ, an explanation should be provided.
The PFI should consider the opening & closing accounts receivable and repayments against those
during the year.

Criterion 9: Portfolio infection ratio & Portfolio delinquency status

IPFF expects the portfolio infection ratio to be not greater than 20%.

Computed as: On balance sheet term credit portfolio affected by arrears at the end of a period


Total on balance sheet term credit portfolio at the end of the same period

The word “arrears” is defined to mean unpaid interest, principal or loan/lease payments
of more than 90 days.

Noted Points:
A loan / lease is to be considered infected if any payment is overdue for three months or more.
Total infected portfolio amount consists of total principal outstanding plus the overdue amounts -
not just the overdue instalments.
The PFI would have to show product-wise breakdown of the portfolio amount (such as lease
finance, term loan, etc.).
Short-term lending and equity investments would be deducted from the total portfolio amount for
this calculation. The amount deducted should be shown so that the IPFF can reconcile the
portfolio figure in criterion 9 with the figures provided for criteria 2 & 14.

The PFI would also provide a list of loans / leases with overdue rental / instalment for 30 days and more,
showing the following information.
Original loan / lease amount
Execution date (not date of signing the agreement)
Loan / lease term
Instalments due
Instalments outstanding
Total overdue amount
Principal amount outstanding

Criterion 10: Debt service cover ratio

Not applicable for commercial banks. IPFF expects the ratio to be minimum of 1.25 times.

Computed as:

Earnings before tax & interest + non-cash expenses + cash collections from on balance sheet term credits

Interest expenses + principal payments associated with on balance sheet term credits

--- Page 24 ---
22

Noted Points:
Include principal payment for all credit sources, including term deposits. Under current BB
regulations NBFI term deposits cannot be less than one year and therefore they should be
considered as term funding. Where there is a strong case to suggest that a certain
percentage/volume of term deposits are always rolled for a further period this can be specified in
a separate explanatory note.
Interest payment, in gross figure, for all credit sources should be considered.

Criterion 11: Single borrower exposure (as % of capital)

IPFF expects the highest single borrower exposure to be less than 35% of capital for banks and to be less
than 30% of capital for NBFIs.

Noted Points:
The PFI would have to provide the top-ten list of exposures.
Exposure is defined to include both on and off balance sheet exposure.
For leases, consider net lease receivable / unrealized principal amount as exposure, not gross
receivable.
Cash securities could be deducted to calculate net exposure, however the FI would need to
specify both gross and net exposures in the assessment.

Criterion 12: Business group borrower exposure (as % of capital)

IPFF expects the highest group borrower exposure to be less than 35% of capital for banks and to be less
than 30% of capital for NBFIs.
“Business Group” is defined to include all interlocking investments, directorships and office positions.

Noted Points:
All points of criterion 11, as above.
If an PFI has business transactions with at least two concerns of the same group, the group name
would be listed under this criterion. But if they have business with only one company, even if the
company is the member of a group, it should not be included in the group list, but only in the
single borrower list under criterion 11.
The definition of a “group” is:
Two or more companies where one director or shareholder controls 50% or more shares
of each company; or
ii)
Where a person, firm, corporation, company or group of companies exercises control or
influence over another company, then both/all are considered a group.

Criterion 13: Insider lending ratio (as % of capital)

IPFF expects the ratio to be less than 25% of capital.

Noted Points:
The auditors’ would have to certify that BB definition of ‘insider lending’ has been followed.
The PFI would provide the list of clients under ‘insider lending’.
The PFI would have to confirm that the loans / leases are on a standard commercial basis. This means they are
not on concessionary terms e.g. in relation to interest rates, fees, tenors, amortization & repayment, collateral

--- Page 25 ---
23
requirements, etc. If the loans / leases are not on a standard commercial basis, the FI would have to specify the
concessionary terms and explain the reason.

Criterion 14: Industry / sub-sector exposure (as % of total portfolio)

IPFF expects highest exposure in a single industry / sub-sector not to be higher than 35% of total
portfolio.

Noted Points:

Total exposure in all sectors should match with the total portfolio amount used earlier. Compare with
criteria 3 & 9.
The PFI could classify the sectors as per the company policy. However when a PFI shows two or
more sectors separately, where the IPFF believes them to be closely related, the IPFF may combine
them.

Criterion 15: Three years’ financial accounts with clean auditor’s opinion without implied / hidden
qualifications

“Hidden or implicit” qualifications are comments in the notes to the financial statements, which are
material and would have a significantly adverse impact on the financial performance and or financial
position, if fully considered, but are not explicitly mentioned in the official opinion of the auditors.

Criterion 16: Policy documents to establish professional and sound management

Resource diversification and mobilization (external funding) plan for the next year
PFI’s procedures for –
Credit approval
Risk management
Collection & monitoring
Asset – liability management
Mobilize domestic resources
Internal audit & control
Marketing visits / Inspections
Annual review of credit
PFI’s policies for
Single / group / sector exposure limit
Insider lending
Insurance of funded assets
DOE clearance
CIB
Management Information System: Small write-up

The self-assessment must confirm an PFI is meeting its commitments under this criterion and the IPFF
may, in its discussion with a PFI, make further enquiries, as it deems necessary.

Noted Points:
PFIs must comment on the status of each of these topics including –
How management addresses each of these issues;
Any significant plans in these areas for the coming year; and
What has been achieved in these areas in the year under review

--- Page 26 ---
24
PFIs must provide a copy of their current Corporate Strategy Statement
PFIs must comment on capacity, including staffing, for carrying out subproject appraisal
(including environmental assessment) and for supervising subproject implementation.

Criterion 17: PFIs loan approval procedures include certification of appropriate Department of
Environment clearance

IPFF funding is not available to an PFI unless the necessary documents are submitted to evidence DOE
certification. However the PFI is also to ensure that all lending (whether it is funded by the IPFF or not)
meets with this requirement. The self-assessment should describe how the PFI’s procedures achieve
verification of required DOE clearance. PFIs must also specify who is responsible for Environmental
Compliance.

Criterion 18: Annual external auditors’ certification as to compliance with quantitative eligibility
criteria

The participating financial intermediaries (PFI) have to submit their eligibility assessment based on the
current year-end accounts every year within the period specified by IPFF.

--- Page 27 ---
25

Annexure 2

The Figure below summarizes IPFF Implementation arrangements








IDA
GoB
BB
Technical
Advisor
IDA
Provides
Credit
(SDR)
Technical Advisor reviews eligibility of
the investment project for financing
BB will be the implementing
agency as per agreement
signed between BB & GoB
Technical Advisor
provides technical
assistance to BB and
EIA to investment
EIA
FI
PFI
The promoter applies for funding to a participating financial
institution (PFI)
The PFI may syndicate the loan with
PFI and non-PFI. 20% of debt must
come from (P)FIs’ own funds
PFI forwards loan
application to BB to
obtain partial funding
of the project
BB provides IPFF facility
on the basis of NOC from
IDA in Taka or US$
Taka or US$
Technical
Advisor
BB sends funding
applications for NOC
Promoter
(with 30%
equity)










Flow of funds

Technical Assistance


Application of funds

Funding Application
Review
Key agreements governing IPFF

Between GoB and IDA : Financing Agreement
Betwween GoB and BB : Administration Agreement
Between BB and Technical Advisor : Technical service
Agreement
Between BB and the PFIs : Master Facility Agreement

--- Page 28 ---
26

Annexure 3
Documentation Checklist

Sl. #
Documents
Reference
01
Application Letter from PFI stating amount of funding requested and a
precise description of the project cost

02
A copy of the summary details of Investment Project as per Annexure 6

03
Confirmation that PFI has agreed with IE in writing as per Annexure 7

04
Copy of investment project/Request from IE to PFI

05
Copy of Investment Project Appraisal which states, inter alia, the benefits
to be derived from IE, project cost and financial plan

06
Copy of PFI's draft Sanction Letter, which includes the proposed terms and
conditions of the Investment Project

07
Copy of the Draft Agreement to be made between the PFI and the
Investment Enterprise (copy of the signed agreement will be provided to
BB in due course)

08
Investment Project Payment/Amortization Schedule (tentative)

09
Arrangement of Insurance policy for usual risks(e.g. fire, theft, flood, riot,
public liability etc., as applicable) in the name of PFI as lender or payable
to PFI (copies of appropriate documents will be provided to BB in due
course)

10
Whether EIA done or not

11
PFI's own Environmental Assessment available or not

12
Clearance Certificate of DOE enclosed or not

13
Clean, current Credit Information Bureau Report on IE (no more than 90
days old from the submission of proposal), all local shareholder Directors
and associated companies.

14
Undertaking of PFI and IE that the assets will be procured as per
procedures described in the OD under the proposed financing (copies of
appropriate documents will be provided in due course)

15
Copy of evidence that the proposed Investment Loan does not include
activities of a military or paramilitary nature or activities in the SITC
groups or subgroups as described in 6(e) of SCHEDULE 5 of the
Financing Agreement between GoB and IDA

16
Arrangement of utilization of 30% equity of the IE and contribution from
PFI's own resources and other institutions (supported documents will be
provided to BB in due course)

17
Procurement Plan of the IE's enclosed or not

18
Whether the Investment Project located inside a protected area or not

19
Whether the Investment Enterprise owns the land where the Investment
Project will be developed

20
Confirmation of PFI that repayments on existing other Loans/Leases to the
IE and its Group members are up to date

21
Inspection Report regarding utilization of 2nd installment/3rd installment

--- Page 29 ---
27











Annexure 4

Excluded Investment Projects


Recognizing the limited national capacity to manage environmental and social risks, and the
requirements of World Bank policies, the following agreements have been reached regarding
investment project types ineligible for support under the IPFF.


• No activities on the IFC/MIGA exclusion list will be financed;
• No investments entailing involuntary resettlement as defined under World Bank OP 4.12
will be financed;
• No investments inside protected areas will be financed.

--- Page 30 ---
28



Annexure 5

[Ref: Guidelines: Procurement under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits, May 2004]

Procurement under BOO/BOT/BOOT,
Concessions and Similar Private Sector
Arrangements


3.13
Where the IPFF is participating in financing the cost of a project procured under a
BOO/BOT/BOOT55, concessions or similar type of private sector arrangement, either of
the following procurement procedures shall be used, as provided for in the Loan
Agreement and further elaborated in the Procurement Plan approved by IDA:

a) The concessionaire or entrepreneur under the BOO/BOT/BOOT or similar type of
contract56 shall be selected under ICB procedures acceptable to IDA, which may include
several stages in order to arrive at the optimal combination of evaluation criteria, such as
the cost and magnitude of the financing offered, the performance specifications of the
facilities offered, the cost charged to the user or purchaser, other income generated for the
Borrower or purchaser by the facility , and the period of the facility's depreciation. The
said entrepreneur selected in this manner shall then be free to procure the goods, works,
and services required for the facility from eligible sources, using its own procedures. In
this case, the Project Appraisal Document, and the Loan Agreement shall specify the type
of expenditures incurred by the said entrepreneur towards which IDA financing will
apply.

Or,

b) If the said concessionaire or entrepreneur has not been selected in the manner set forth in
subparagraph (a) above, the goods, works, or services required for the facility and to be
financed by IDA shall be procured in accordance with ICB procedures defined in Section
II.






55 BOO: Build, Own, Operate; BOT: Build, Operate, Transfer;
BOOT: Build, Own, Operate, Transfer.
56 For projects such as toll roads, tunnels, harbors, bridges, power stations, waste disposal plants, and water
distribution systems.

--- Page 31 ---
29


[Ref: Guidelines: Procurement under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits, May 2004]


Eligibility


1.8 As exceptions to the foregoing:

(c) Government-owned enterprises in the Borrower's country may participate only if
they can establish that they (i) are legally and financially autonomous, (ii) operate
under the commercial law, and (iii) are not dependent agencies of the Borrower.

--- Page 32 ---
30
Annexure 06
Name of the PFI:

i) Description of the IE and Appraisal of the IP
01
Name of IE

02
Legal Status

03
Nature of business

04
Sub-sector

05
Location

06
Group Name

07
Project cost

08
Loan or Lease

09
Loan/Lease amount

10
Total IE group exposure

11
Precise description of assets to be financed

12
Procurement practice
(established
commercial
practice)
13
Country of origin from where assets to be procured

14
IE repayment record

15
Financial plan

16
Forecast cash flow (years 1-3)

17
Forecast profitability ( years 1-3)

18
IE-PFI relationship
(new or existing)
19
Insurance status

20
Environmental compliance status

ii) Terms and conditions of the Loan/Lease financing
21
Period of Loan/Lease

22
Grace period

23
Maturity date

24
Interest rate

25
Description of Security

26
Repayment /Amortisation schedule

--- Page 33 ---
31
Annexure 07


i)The PFI will confirm that the Investment Project, for which the financing is sought, will be
carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in accordance with sound technical,
financial and managerial standards; that the Investment Project will maintain adequate
project records; and that PFI/BB/IDA will have the right of inspection .

ii)The PFI shall obtain the right to inspect , by itself or jointly with representatives of the
IDA and BB, such assets and sites, works, plants and construction included in the Investment
Project, the operation thereof, and any relevant records and documents.

iii) The PFI shall obtain the right to obtain all such information as BB, the IDA or the PFI
reasonably request relating to the foregoing and to the administration, operation and financial
condition of the IE and to the benefits to be derived from the Investment project.

iv)The PFI shall obtain the right to suspend or terminate the right of the IE to the use of IDA
funding upon failure by the IE to perform its obligations under contract with the PFI.