--- Page 1 ---
(50080)
Telex : Banglabank
Telephone : 7126101-20
Fax : 7120362

Financial Institutions Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka




FID Circular No. 10 Dated - 18 September, 2005



Managing Director/Chief Executive
All Financial Institutions


Dear Sir,
Guidelines on ‘‘Managing Core Risks of Financial Institutions(non-bank)"


You are aware that Risk is the element of uncertainty or possibility of loss that prevail in any
business transaction in any place, on any mode and any time. Deregulated regimes alongwith globalization of
business has opened new frontiers that warrants risk management an even greater priority. The failure to
adequately manage these risks exposes financial institutions(non-bank) not only to business losses but may
also result in circumstances that they can not remain in business. Therefore, at the heart of good governance
of this business is effective management of these risks to ensure sustainable performance.

Although rapid developments are taking place internationally in this area, financial institutions(non-
bank) have not yet put in place a robust and structured framework for risk management. In recognition of the
importance of an effective risk management system, Bangladesh Bank undertook a project to review the
global best practices in this area and examine the possibility of introducing these in the non-bank financial
industry of Bangladesh. The four `core' risk areas of financial institutions(non-bank) have been identified
which are -
Credit Risk;
Asset & Liability/Balance Sheet Risks;
Internal Control and Compliance Risks ; and
IT Security Risk

Three `Focus Groups' were formed with participation from financial institutions(non-bank) with
representatives from the Bangladesh Bank as team coordinators to look into the industry best practices both
home and abroad and produce a document that would be a basic risk management model for each of the
selected three core risk areas.

--- Page 2 ---
The purpose of this document is to provide directional guidelines to the financial institutions(non-bank) that
will improve the risk management culture, establish minimum standards for segregation of duties and
responsibilities, and assist in the ongoing improvement of the financial institutions(non-bank) in Bangladesh.
These documents are the manuals/guidelines, which are not complete in them but can form the basis on
which financial institutions can either produce more sophisticated risk management models or follow these
as a minimum starting point and develop them further as they progress.


Financial Institutions(non-bank) are, therefore, advised to put in place an effective risk management
system by June, 2006 based on the guidelines are sending here with. These guidelines are flexible in the
sense that financial institutions can adopt and adapt them in line with the size and complexity of their
business. Bangladesh Bank will, based on its regular examination of individual financial institutions(non-
bank), enforce the specific adoption of these guidelines.


Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faithfully,


(Sudhir Chandra Das)
Deputy General Manager
Phone : 7120956.