--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 5


Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh
www.bb.org.bd

Supervisory Policy and
Coordination Department
SPCD Circular No. 03
Date:
09 Poush 1432
24 December 2025

Managing Directors/Chief Executive Officers
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Implementation of Risk Based Supervision (RBS): Framework, Organogram, Operational
Arrangements, Supervisory Engagement, and Regulatory Reporting Requirements
Please refer to SPCD Circular No. 02 dated 23 October 2025, in terms of which
Bangladesh Bank (BB) communicated the supervisory expectations and preparatory measures
required of all scheduled banks to ensure readiness for the transition to Risk Based Supervision
(RBS) from January 2026. With a view to ensuring a smooth and effective transition to the RBS
framework, this circular sets out the operational, supervisory, and reporting arrangements
applicable from the commencement of RBS.
02. In view of the increasing globalization of financial services, rapid technological
advancement, product innovation, and heightened interconnectedness of financial institutions,
the complexity of banking operations and the overall risk profile of banks have significantly
increased. Traditional compliance-based supervision, which primarily emphasizes rule-checking
and reliance on historical data, is considered no longer sufficient to proactively address these
evolving challenges and risks. In this context, BB has decided to implement RBS, which is
expected to strengthen forward-looking assessment of risks and the effectiveness of risk
governance, promote enhanced risk awareness, accountability and prudent risk culture across
banks, and support sustainable innovation while safeguarding overall financial stability.
Accordingly, RBS shall be implemented with effect from 01 January 2026. Under this
framework, all banks are required to operate, maintain and strengthen their systems, internal
controls, and governance structure in conformity with the supervisory expectations mentioned in
SPCD Circular No. 02 dated 23 October 2025.
03. This circular shall be applied to all scheduled banks operating in Bangladesh and
shall cover all business lines, functions, and activities that have a material impact on a bank’s
overall risk profile. The scope of RBS shall extend to all scheduled banks, both on a solo and
consolidated basis, within the purview of the Bank Company Act, 1991.
04. Under the RBS framework, supervisory assessment shall be grounded in a structured
evaluation of a bank’s inherent risks, inter alia, credit, market, operational, legal and regulatory,
strategic, ML/TF, technology, and other emerging risks relevant to the bank’s operation and risk
exposures; the effectiveness of the bank’s risk governance arrangements, including Board and

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 5

senior management oversight; adequacy and effectiveness of internal control and risk
management systems including risk culture; and implementation of risk mitigation measures.
The overall assessment shall culminate in the determination of a bank’s Composite Risk Rating
and the corresponding calibration of intensity, frequency, and depth of supervisory engagement
based on the materiality of identified risks and weaknesses in the quality of risk management.
Supervision under RBS shall be forward-looking, with emphasis on early identification and
evaluation of emerging risks; continuous in nature through a combination of off-site monitoring
and targeted on-site reviews; and proportionate to the bank’s size, complexity, and systemic
importance.
05. In order to support effective implementation of RBS, BB has undertaken a
comprehensive restructuring of its supervisory organogram. The objectives of this restructuring
are to establish a clear single-point supervisory interface for each bank, eliminate duplication and
fragmentation in supervisory data submission, and promote a more coordinated, risk-focused,
and forward-looking supervisory approach. Under the restructured framework, supervisory
responsibilities have been realigned to ensure holistic bank-specific supervision through
dedicated Bank Supervision Departments, while enabling specialized and cross-cutting oversight
in critical areas such as supervisory policy coordination, data management and analytics,
technology risk and digital banking supervision, money laundering and terrorist financing risks,
and payment system oversight. This structure is intended to enhance supervisory consistency,
strengthen risk identification and escalation, improve data quality and analytical capability, and
support timely supervisory intervention. Accordingly, Bangladesh Bank has established a total of
seventeen supervisory departments comprising twelve Bank Supervision Departments (BSD-1 to
BSD-12) and five specialized supervisory departments. As part of this transition, the existing
inspection and function-based supervisory departments have been streamlined and integrated into
the new RBS-aligned structure, to be effective from 01 January 2026. The list of dissolved and
new supervisor departments is provided in Annexure-1. Out of the seventeen departments listed
in the annexure, the SPCD was established earlier, and the banks were duly informed through
SPCD Circular No. 01 dated 03 August 2025.
06. Under the RBS framework, each BSD shall carry out full supervision of its
designated banks through a single dedicated supervisory team for each bank. The team will
conduct continuous supervision (off-site and on-site) and cover all key supervisory areas,
including foreign exchange operations and complaint management, while maintaining the bank’s
risk profile and ensuring timely supervisory intervention and follow-up. The distribution of
banks among BSDs is provided in Annexure-2. Among the five specialized supervisory
departments, the Supervisory Data Management and Analytics Department (SDAD) will serve as
the central hub for supervisory data collection, validation, data quality assurance, and sectoral
risk analysis to support timely, evidence-based supervision. The Technology Risk and Digital
Banking Supervision Department (TRDS) will oversee risks emerged from technology and
digital banking under RBS. The Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Prevention
Department (AMLD) will carry dedicated supervisory responsibility for ML/TF risk while the
Payment Systems Supervision Department (PSSD) will oversee the risk associated with payment
and settlement systems of the banks. Each department is designed to strengthen supervisory
consistency, depth, and responsiveness in its specialized domain. Detailed Terms of Reference
(ToR) of all supervision departments will be available in Bangladesh Bank Website.
07. RBS framework shall adopt an integrated approach to ensure proactive identification
of risks, enforcement of corrective measures, and enhanced resilience of supervised entities.
Bank Supervisors shall be in continuous contact with banks through both off-site and on-site
engagement to conduct risk assessments and communicate expectations, findings, and risk

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 of 5

mitigation measures. Formal supervisory engagement shall be primarily carried out via
Supervisory Letters, regulatory circulars/guidelines, enforcement notices, and Supervisory
Reports. Supervisory Letters shall convey observations, concerns, and corrective actions to banks
while Supervisory Reports shall provide insights into a bank’s risk profile, governance, control
effectiveness, financial resilience, and supervisory measures. Supervisors shall also hold
structured meetings and dialogues with Boards of Directors, Chief Executive Officers, Senior
Management and other stakeholders of banks. Onsite engagement shall include full-scope or
targeted inspections covering credit, market, operational, legal and regulatory, and strategic risks,
as well as governance and internal control practices, while thematic reviews shall be conducted
with emphasis on high-risk areas such as credit concentration, ML/TF, and cyber security. Off-
site engagement shall involve reviewing regulatory returns and reports, seeking clarifications
through official correspondence, and analyzing data to identify vulnerabilities. Additionally,
supervisors shall also be engaged in follow-up and remedial activities, monitoring the
implementation progress of action plan and validating effectiveness through compliance testing.

08. Under the RBS framework, each bank shall be assigned a Lead Bank Supervisor who
shall serve the bank as the primary supervisory point of contact. The Lead Bank Supervisor shall
coordinate supervisory activities relating to the bank, facilitate continuous supervisory dialogue
and communicate Supervisory Letter as well as monitor and follow up on supervisory
interventions. Banks are expected to ensure effective, transparent, and timely engagement with
the assigned Lead Bank Supervisor at all times. All banks shall designate a Focal Point official
for RBS, following criteria specified in SPCD Circular No. 02 dated 23 October 2025, who shall
act as the primary point of contact to liaison with the Lead Bank Supervisor and the supervisory
team for supporting the supervisory process as well as addressing the supervisory concerns and
ensuring timely compliance of the supervisory observations, action points and concerns
mentioned, inter alia, in the Risk Assessment Report, Supervisory Letter and the Risk Mitigation
Plan. Besides, Lead Bank Supervisors shall communicate letters any time whenever any material
issues identified for addressing and resolving those issues.
09. For effective transition to RBS, Bangladesh Bank has adopted a phased approach to
supervisory data consolidation where all supervisory data shall be brought gradually under a
single platform to avoid redundancy and duplication of data submission. In this regard, with the
implementation of RBS from 01 January 2026, the following directives shall be applied to all
banks with respect to data reporting requirements:
A. Centralized submission portal

All regulatory returns, reports and documents that were previously submitted to the
dissolved supervision departments as mentioned in annexure-1 — and which were not
already collected via web portal— shall be submitted to SDAD following the same
channel and frequency specified in applicable circulars or guidelines until further
instruction.

B. Existing web-portal submissions
Data already submitted to any of the dissolved departments via web portal shall be
continued through the same portal and with the same frequency as mentioned in the
applicable circulars or guidelines until further instruction.

C. RITs for Structured Data
Without prejudice to other reporting requirements, banks are required to submit
structured data using the prescribed RITs through the designated web portal:

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 5

https://ereturns.bb.org.bd/ strictly in accordance with the submission frequency and
deadline applicable to each template as follows.
SL
Name of RITs
Submission
Frequency
Submission Deadline
T_M_RBS_MAIN
Monthly
basis
By the 15th of the
following month
T_M_RBS_DEPOSIT_CONCENTRATION
Monthly
basis
By the 10th of the
following month
T_M_RBS_IB_TRANS_MATRIX
Monthly
basis
By the 15th of the
following month
T_Q_RBS_ALL_CLAIMS
Quarterly
basis
By the last day of the
following month
T_Q_RBS_PAST_DUE
Quarterly
basis
By the 20th of the
following month
T_Q_RBS_ECAIS
Quarterly
basis
By the last day of the
following month
T_Q_RBS_BORROWERS_CONCENTRATION
Quarterly
basis
By the last day of the
following month
T_Q_RBS_DEFAULTERS_CONCENTRATION
Quarterly
basis
By the 20th of the
following month
T_Q_RBS_SUBSIDIARY_INFORMATION
Quarterly
basis
By the last day of the
following month
10. T_Q_RBS_LIST_OF_SHAREHOLDERS
Quarterly
basis
By the 12th of the
following month
11. T_Q_RBS_INVESTMENT_AGAINST_BOND_CP
Quarterly
basis
By the 10th of the
following month
12. T_Q_RBS_MAIN
Quarterly
basis
By the last day of the
following month
13. T_Q_RBS_SUMMARY
Quarterly
basis
By the 20th of the
following month

D. Unstructured data

1. Banks are required to upload all unstructured data/reports as listed in annexure-3 to
the designated web portal https://ereturns.bb.org.bd/ .

2. From data/reports listed in annexure-3, where a specific timeline is prescribed under
any relevant regulatory instruction through circulars/guidelines/any other ways, those
shall be submitted to the above-mentioned portal strictly in accordance with such
applicable timeline and frequency. The remaining data/reports shall be submitted as
or when updated.

--- Page 5 ---
Page 5 of 5

E. Data Quality
Banks shall ensure the accuracy, completeness, consistency and timeliness of all
structured and unstructured data to be submitted under the RBS framework. Persistent
data quality deficiencies or material misreporting etc. may be viewed as a reflection of
failure of the governance and internal controls of the bank, leading to punitive measures.
10. It is mentionable here that the supervisory expectations outlined in SPCD Circular
No. 02 dated 23 October 2025 remain fully applicable and continue to form the foundation of
supervisory assessment under the RBS framework. In line with these expectations, banks are
required to establish and operationalize effective risk governance frameworks, while
strengthening oversight by the Board of Directors and Senior Management. It is essential to
ensure the independence and effectiveness of key control functions, including risk management,
compliance, and internal audit, supported by robust management information systems (MIS) and
comprehensive risk data aggregation capabilities. Moreover, the principles of RBS should be
fully embedded into the banks’ day-to-day decision-making processes. Progress in meeting these
supervisory expectations shall have a direct impact on risk rating, intensity of supervisory
oversight, frequency of supervisory engagement, and the potential application of supervisory
measures.
11. Banks are required to fully comply with all aspects of the RBS framework, including
the timely submission of data, proactive engagement with supervisory processes, and prompt
implementation of corrective actions. Any failure to meet these obligations shall attract enhanced
supervisory scrutiny and may lead to the issuance of regulatory directives or other measures
considered appropriate by Bangladesh Bank.
12. This circular is issued in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 45 of the
Bank Company Act, 1991.



Yours faithfully,

(Mohammad Abdur Rab)
Director (SPCD)
Phone: 9530173
Annexure: 4 Pages

--- Page 6 ---
Annexure-1
List of Dissolved and New Supervision Departments
*Payment Systems Department (Division-3) has been renamed as Payment Systems Supervision
Department and brought under supervisory framework.



Dissolved Supervision Departments
New Supervision Departments
1. Department of Banking Inspection-1
2. Department of Banking Inspection-2
3. Department of Banking Inspection-3
4. Department of Banking Inspection-4
5. Department of Banking Inspection-5
6. Department of Banking Inspection-6
7. Department of Banking Inspection-7
8. Department of Banking Inspection-8
9. Department of Banking Inspection-9
10. Department of Foreign Exchange Inspection
11. Department of Off-site Supervision
(Division-1, 2)
12. Integrated Supervision Management
Department
13. Financial Integrity and Customer Services
Department (Division-1, 2)
1. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-1
2. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-2
3. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-3
4. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-4
5. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-5
6. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-6
7. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-7
8. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-8
9. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-9
10. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-10
11. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-11
12. Bank Supervision Department (BSD)-12
13. Technology Risks and Digital Banking
Supervision Department (TRDS)
14. Supervisory Data management and Analytics
Department (SDAD)
15. Supervisory Policy and Coordination Department
(SPCD)
16. Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing
Prevention Department (AMLD)
17. Payment Systems Supervision Department (PSSD)*

--- Page 7 ---
ii

Annexure-2
Banks under Bank Supervision Departments
Bank Supervision Department-1
Sonali Bank PLC
One Bank PLC
Habib Bank Limited
Karmasangsthan Bank*

Bank Supervision Department-2
Janata Bank PLC
Mercantile Bank PLC
Commercial Bank of Ceylon PLC
Palli Sanchay Bank*

Bank Supervision Department-3
Agrani Bank PLC
Jamuna Bank PLC
Rajshahi Krishi Unnayan Bank
BASIC Bank PLC

Bank Supervision Department-4
Rupali Bank PLC
National Credit and Commerce Bank PLC
Woori Bank
Bangladesh Krishi Bank

Bank Supervision Department-5
Pubali Bank PLC
United Commercial Bank PLC
Midland Bank PLC
Citizens Bank PLC
SBAC Bank PLC
Standard Chartered Bank
Ansar VDP Unnayan Bank*

Bank Supervision Department-6
BRAC Bank PLC
AB Bank PLC
Modhumoti Bank PLC
NRBC Bank PLC
HSBC Limited
Probashi Kallyan Bank

Bank Supervision Department-7
Dutch-Bangla Bank PLC
The City Bank PLC
National Bank PLC
Bengal Commercial Bank PLC
Bank Alfalah
Grameen Bank*

Bank Supervision Department-8
Dhaka Bank PLC
Mutual Trust Bank PLC
Shimanto Bank PLC
Meghna Bank PLC
State Bank of India
Bangladesh Development Bank PLC
Jubilee Bank*

Bank Supervision Department-9
Southeast Bank PLC
Eastern Bank PLC
The Premier Bank PLC
Community Bank Bangladesh PLC
Bangladesh Commerce Bank Limited
National Bank of Pakistan

Bank Supervision Department-10
Uttara Bank PLC
IFIC Bank PLC
Trust Bank PLC
Padma Bank PLC
NRB Bank PLC
Citibank N.A.
Investment Corporation of Bangladesh*

Bank Supervision Department-11
Islami Bank Bangladesh PLC
Shahjalal Islami Bank PLC
Prime Bank PLC
ICB Islamic Bank Limited

Bank Supervision Department-12
Al-Arafah Islami Bank PLC
Standard Bank PLC
Bank Asia PLC
Sammilito Islami Bank PLC (EXIM Bank PLC,
Social Islami Bank PLC, First Security Islami
Bank PLC, Global Islami Bank PLC, Union
Bank PLC.)
* Relevant Bank Supervision Departments will oversee the non-scheduled banks/institutions

--- Page 8 ---
iii

Annexure-3
List of Unstructured Data/Reports
Particulars
Reports and Statements
1. Latest internal audit report on
a) Largest branches accounting for at least 60% of the bank's assets
b) Corporate Division
c) SME Division
d) Consumer-credit/Retail-credit related division
e) Credit Risk Management Division
Credit Administration Division
g) Treasury Division
h) International Division
Centralized Trade Processing Unit
Risk Management Division
k) Reconciliation department
Financial Administration Division
m) IT Division
n) ICT-related internal audit report for the divisions/branches as mentioned above
2. Management Report
3. Report on credit ratings of banks
4. Statement of Willful Defaulters
5. Annual Health report
6. Audited Financial Statements (excel copy & pdf)
7. Detailed statement of affairs (GL)
8. ICAAP Report
9. Report on Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book (IRRBB)
10. Stress test report
11. ALCO Report
12. Risk Appetite Statement of Bank
13. Comprehensive Risk Management Report
14. Report on effectiveness of Internal Control & Compliance
15. Report on effectiveness of Risk Management Function
16. Self-assessment of anti-fraud internal control report
17. Statement of fraud and forgeries detected and unsettled upto previous reporting period since inception of
the bank
18. Statement of fraud and forgeries detected during reporting period
19. Statement regarding penalties imposed by regulatory authority.
20. Review reports of Quarterly Operations Report (QOR) and Loan Documentation Check list (LDCL)
Internal policies/manual and plans
1. Operational risk and fraud management policy
2. Internal policies on six core risk (CRM, FX, ALM, ICC, ICT and AML/CFT)
3. Whistle-blowing policy, if any
4. Succession plans of BoD Chairman, CEO and the functional heads
5. 5-year strategic plan
6. Detailed annual budget plan
7. Capital management plan

--- Page 9 ---
iv

Meeting Agenda:
1. Board of Director Meeting
2. Executive Committee Meeting
3. Audit Committee Meeting
4. Risk Management Committee Meeting
Meeting Minutes
1. Board of Director meeting minutes
2. Board Audit Committee meeting minutes
3. Board Risk Management committee meeting minutes
4. Senior Management meeting minutes
5. ALCO meeting minutes
6. Credit Committee meeting minutes
7. Executive/Management Level Risk Management Committee meeting minutes
Sanctioned Advice/Letter of Top 20 Borrowers
ML/TF related documents
1. Report on CTR & STR (total number & value)
2. Information regarding ongoing investigations against its officials or clients by any statutory bodies (BB,
ACC, NBR, Custom Authority etc.)
3. Internal ML/TF Risk Assessment Report
4. Information regarding penalty imposed by BB regarding ML/TF issues
5. Special findings from Bangladesh Bank regarding ML/TF
6. Observation and compliances thereof regarding Core Risk Inspection (ML/TF)
7. Observations from external and internal audit related with ML/TF
8. Significant ML/TF related event
9. ML/TF training statistics
10. CEO message regarding ML/TF
11. Future plan on ML/TF prevention framework development
Internal Audit related documents
1. Details of Internal Auditors including IS audit and shariah audit (if any) [Name, Qualification, Service
tenure in audit, Training received including time and duration, Latest 3 working station's
(divisions/branch) name & service tenure in that division/branch]
2. Annual Audit Plan & Implementation status
Legal issues related documents
1. Policies and procedures relating to legal and regulatory risk
2. List of employees in Legal division with qualification and experience
3. List of training on legal and regulatory matters for BoD (Name of the training programs, Number of
respective trainings organized during the year, no of board member attended)
4. List of training programs tailored to legal and regulatory compliance for Senior Management (name of the
training programs, number of respective trainings organized during the year, No of members of Senior
Management attended)
5. List of regular trainings to staff members on legal risks and regulatory compliance (Name of the training
programs, number of respective trainings organized during the year along with number of staff attended )
6. List of in-house legal counsel e.g. panel lawyer with qualification and experience
7. Reports on the bank's legal and regulatory risk profile and compliance activities (presented to the Board)
Other Documents/Information:
1. Detailed organogram (organizational structures including branch/division and reporting lines with
manpower allocation)
2. Delegation of power for loan sanction and investment
3. Details on staff of different divisions: Consumer Credit, SME, Corporate, CRM, CAD, Treasury, FAD &
IT (to be submitted in separate tables for each division) including information on name, designation,
qualification, service tenure in current division, work experience in previous division including name of
that division, titles of the training received etc.