--- Page 1 ---
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
Website: www.bb.org.bd

Department of Banking Inspection‐ 2
(MIS & RBI Cell)


February 24, 2014
DBI‐2 Circular No‐ 01

Date: ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐


Falgun 12, 1420
Managing Directors/ Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,
Providing information in the Integrated Supervision System

Attention of all concerned is invited to Section 36(2) of the Bank Company Act, 1991 (amended
in 2013), and to letter no‐ DBI‐2(MIS & RBI Division)/22/2013‐367 dated 04‐08‐2013 from this
department, on the captioned subject.
2. All head offices and AD branches of all scheduled banks were advised to provide information
according to the format attached therewith in aforesaid letter. As a part of the ongoing automation
process of Bangladesh Bank and with a view to making the Integrated Supervision System more
effective, the existing formats have been formatted anew by adding requirement of some more
information. In this context, in the first phase, head offices and AD branches of the scheduled banks shall
submit monthly report through the Web Portal of Bangladesh Bank providing information in the revised
ISS Forms 1, 2, 3 & 4 before the 10th of the following month, beginning in February 2014.

3. Besides uploading information through the Web Portal as indicated above, head offices of
banks shall preserve back‐up (prepared in Excel format) copies; the back‐up copies of the ISS Forms‐
1,2,3 & 4, prepared in Excel format will also have to be sent to the MIS & RBI Cell of this department via
the e‐mail address bb.iss@bb.org.bd before the 10th of each month.

4. At the end of each quarter, branches of the scheduled banks shall send soft copy of CL
statements prepared in Excel format (CL Form‐1 to CL Form‐5) to their Head Offices before 15th day of
the following month. The Head Offices of banks shall in turn submit soft copies of the quarterly CL
statements, received from all branches, to this department through CD/pen drive or via e‐mail address
bb.iss@bb.org.bd before 25th day of the same month.

5. Financial penalties and other punitive measures will be applicable in terms of the relevant
sections of the Bank Company Act, 1991 (amended in 2013) for default in submission of the statements
prescribed above, as also for submission of incomplete or wrong information in these statements.

6. If for unavoidable reasons it becomes impracticable to submit the returns/statements within
the prescribed timeline, the MIS & RBI Cell of this department shall have to be informed in writing at
least two days before the deadline of submitting the statements.

Attachment:
ISS Form ‐ 1 applicable for Head Office

ISS Form ‐ 2 applicable for all branches (AD and Non‐AD)

ISS Form ‐ 3 applicable for Head Office

ISS Form ‐ 4 applicable for all branches (AD and Non‐AD)

Instructions on how to fill in ISS information and send information via web.



Yours sincerely,

Sd/‐
(Md. Mustafa Kamal)
Deputy General Manager
Phone‐ 9530256