--- Page 1 ---
Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office, Dhaka
BRPD Circular No. -11


12 December 2011
Date ------------------------
28 Agrahayan 1418
Chief Executive/Managing Director of
all banking companies working in Bangladesh

Dear Sir(s),
Regarding Maintenance of Deferred Tax Accounts
Please refer to BRPD Circular No. 6, dated 31 July 2011.
For the purpose of reflecting actual financial status, while recognizing the Deferred Tax
Asset and Liabilities in the financial statements banks are instructed to follow the rules as
mentioned below:
1. Deferred Tax Asset may be recognized complying with the Bangladesh
Accounting Standards (BAS) on the expenses for which, according to the income
tax law, a future tax benefit will be received. However, a description on Deferred
Tax Asset should be provided in “Notes to the Accounts” section of the Financial
Statements (i.e. basis and method of calculation, amount, expected time of
adjustment etc.);
2. Deferred Tax Liabilities must be recognized for those items which are mentioned
to recognize in Bangladesh Accounting Standards;
3. Following instructions are to be followed if Deferred Tax Asset is calculated and
recognized based on the provisions against classified loan, advances or
investments (in case of banks operating under Islamic Shariah):
a) Amount of the net income after tax increased due to recognition of
deferred tax asset on such provisions will not be distributed as dividend;
b) The amount of deferred tax asset recognized on such provisions should be
deducted while calculating the Regulatory Eligible Capital of the
Statement of Capital Adequacy Requirement of Annual Financial Report
and Statement submitted to Bangladesh Bank;
c) A description should be provided regarding deferred tax asset recognized
on loan loss provisions in the Notes to the financial Statement section of
the Financial Statements (i.e. amount, method of calculation, year of
origin, amount recognized and realized in current year etc.).
This circular is issued with the authority vested under section 45 of the Bank Companies
Act, 1991, which shall take effect immediately cancelling BRPD Circular No. 06 dated 31
July 2011.


Yours Faithfully,
Sd/-


(K. M. Abdul Wadood)
General Manager
Phone: 7117825