--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bangladesh-bank.org
www.bangladeshbank.org.bd
www.bb.org.bd

Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

February 27, 2011
BRPD Circular No.02




Date: ----------------------
Falgun 15, 1417

Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Policy Guidelines for Green Banking

Introduction:
We are aware that global warming is an issue that calls for a global response. The rapid
change in climate will be too great to allow many eco-systems to suitably adapt, since the
change have direct impact on biodiversity, agriculture, forestry, dry land, water resources
and human health. Due to unusual weather pattern, rising greenhouse gas, declining air
quality etc. society demands that business also take responsibility in safeguarding the
planet. Green finance as a part of Green Banking makes great contribution to the
transition to resource-efficient and low carbon industries i.e. green industry and green
economy in general. Green banking is a component of the global initiative by a group of
stakeholders to save environment. The state of environment in Bangladesh is rapidly
deteriorating. The key areas of environmental degradation cover air pollution, water
pollution and scarcity, encroachment of rivers, improper disposal of industrial medical
and house-hold waste, deforestation, loss of open space and loss of biodiversity. In
addition, Bangladesh is one of the most climate change vulnerable countries. In line with
global development and response to the environmental degradation, financial sector in
Bangladesh should play important roles as one of the key stake holders.

In response to the above, urgent measures are required by stake holders for sustainable
development and thereby save the planet. Banks hold a unique position in an economic
system that can affect production, business and other economic activities through their
financing activities and thus may contribute to pollute environment. Moreover, energy
and water efficiency and waste reduction are of high concern for many big banks. Green
banks or environmentally responsible banks do not only improve their own standards but
also affect socially responsible behavior of other business.

Bangladesh Bank's Earlier Initiatives:

BB is well aware of the environmental degradation situation as mentioned above and has
already given time to time directions to all scheduled banks. Commercial Banks are now
required to ensure necessary measures to protect environmental pollution while financing
a new project or providing working capital to the existing enterprises. Banks have been
advised to facilitate their clients with utmost care in opening Letter of Credit (L/C) for
installation of Effluent Treatment Plant(ETP) in the industrial units. Banks have been
advised to finance in Solar Energy, Bio-gas, ETP and Hybrid Hoffman Kiln (HHK) in
brick field under refinance programme of BB. A comprehensive guidelines on Corporate
Social Responsibility (CSR) has been issued where banks have been asked to concentrate

contd……..p/2

--- Page 2 ---
hard on linking CSR at their highest corporate level for ingraining environmentally and
socially responsible practices and engaging with borrowers in scrutiny of the
environmental and social impacts. Banks have been brought under the purview of
E-commerce with a view to providing the customers with online-banking facilities
covering payments of utility bills, money transfer and transactions in local currency
through internet as well. Considering the adverse effects of Climate Change, banks have
been advised to be cautious about the adverse impact of natural calamities and encourage
the farmers to cultivate salinity resistant crops in the salty areas, water resistant crops in
the water locked and flood prone areas, drought resistant crops in the drought prone
areas, using surface water instead of underground water for irrigation and also using
organic fertilizer, insecticides by natural means instead of using chemical fertilizer and
pesticides.

Adopting Green Banking Policy:

Now it is the high time for the banks to adopt a comprehensive Green Banking Policy in
a formal and structured manner in line with global norms so as to protect environmental
degradation and ensure sustainable banking practices.

With a view to developing green banking practices in the country, an indicative Green
Banking Policy and Strategy framework has been developed for the banks in the
following manner:

Green Banking Policy needs to be covered through time frame work which will be
segregated into 3 phases.

1. Phase-I

Banks are to develop green banking policies and show general commitment on
environment through in-house performance. The time lining for the actions to be taken
under Phase-I should not exceed December 31, 2011.

1.1 Policy Formulation and Governance

Bank shall formulate and adopt broad environmental or Green Banking policy and
strategy approved by their Board of Directors. A high powered Committee comprises of
directors from the Board in case of scheduled Bangladeshi Banks and a high powered
committee comprises Regional Chief of Global Office and members from the top
management including CEO in case of Foreign Banks should be responsible for
reviewing the banks environmental policies, strategies and program. Bank shall approve a
considerable fund in their annual budget allocation for green banking.

Banks are required to establish a separate Green Banking Unit or Cell having the
responsibility of designing, evaluating and administering related green banking issues of
the bank. A senior executive should be assigned with the responsibility of heading the
unit. The unit will report to the high powered committee time to time.

1.2 Incorporation of Environmental Risk in CRM

Banks shall comply with the instructions stipulated in the detailed guidelines on
Environmental Risk Management (ERM) in consideration of a part of the Green Banking
Policy. Bank shall incorporate Environmental and Climate Change Risk as part of the
existing credit risk methodology prescribed to assess a prospective borrower. This will
include integrating environmental risks in the checklists, audit guidelines and reporting
formats. All of this will help mainstream Environmental Risk that cover possible sources
of Environmental Risk such as Land use, Climate change related events (cyclone,
drought), animal diseases/pathogens such as avian influenza, solid waste including waste
feed, animal waste, carcasses, sediments, wastewater discharges, hazardous materials, etc
will be reviewed under Environmental Due Diligence (EDD) checklists.

contd……..p/3

--- Page 3 ---
1.3 Initiating In-house Environment Management

Banks shall prepare an inventory of the consumption of water, paper, electricity, energy
etc. by its offices and branches in different places. Then it should take measures to save
electricity, water and paper consumption. A 'Green Office Guide' or at least a set of
general instructions should be circulated to the employees for efficient use of electricity,
water, paper and reuse of equipments. In place of relying on printed documents, online
communication should be extensively used (where possible) for office management and
make sure that the printers are defaulted to duplex for double-side printing to save papers.
Banks may apply Ecofont in printing to reduce use of ink, use scrap paper as notepads
and avoid disposable cups/glasses to become more eco- friendly. Installation of energy
efficient electronic equipments and automatic shutdown of computers, fans, lights, air
coolers etc. will help reducing electricity consumption. Energy saving bulbs should
replace normal bulbs in branches/offices of the banks. Banks should make plan to use
solar energy at their premises to save electricity. Bank should take steps to save energy
from corporate business travel and encourage employees to purchase energy efficient cars
(that consume less fuel) can reduce gas and petroleum consumption.

1.4 Introducing Green finance

Eco friendly business activities and energy efficient industries will be given preference in
financing by bank. Environmental infrastructure such as renewable energy project, clean
water supply project, wastewater treatment plant, solid & hazardous waste disposal plant,
bio-gas plant, bio-fertilizer plant should be encouraged and financed by bank. Consumer
loan programs may be applied for promoting environmental practices among clients.

1.5 Creation of Climate Risk Fund
Bank should finance the economic activities of the flood, cyclone and drought prone
areas at the regular interest rate without charging additional risk premium. However,
banks should assess their environmental risks for financing the sectors in different areas
for creating a Climate Change Risk Fund. This will be used in case of emergency. The
bank would ensure regular financing flows in these vulnerable areas and sectors. The
fund could be created as part of banks’ CSR expenses.

1.6 Introducing Green Marketing

Green marketing is the marketing of products that are presumed to be environmentally
safe. Green marketing incorporates a broad range of activities, including product
modification, changes to the production process, packaging changes, as well as
modifying advertising. It refers to the process of selling products and/or services based on
their environmental benefits. Such a product or service may be environmentally friendly
in itself or produced and/or packaged in an environmentally friendly way.

Banks should use environmental causes for marketing their services to consumer. Green
marketing is expected to help awareness development among common people.

1.7 Online Banking

Online banking is the practice of making bank transactions or paying bills via the Internet
on a secure website of the respective bank that allows the customers to make deposits,
withdrawals and pay bills.

Banks should give more emphasis to make the easiest way to help environment by
eliminating paper waste, saving gas and carbon emission, reducing printing costs and
postage expenses.

contd……..p/4

--- Page 4 ---
1.8 Supporting Employee Training, Consumer Awareness and Green Event

Employee awareness development and training on environmental and social risk and the
relevant issues should be a continuous process as part of the bank's Human Recourse
Development. Awareness development among consumers and clients would be a
continuous job of a bank under its public relation department.

1.9 Disclosure and Reporting of Green Banking Activities

Banks shall report on the initiatives/practices to BB and disclose in their respective
websites.

2. Phase-II

The time lining for the actions to be taken under Phase-II should not exceed December
31, 2012.

2.1 Sector Specific Environmental Policies
Banks need to formulate strategies to design specific policies for different environmental
sensitive sectors such as Agriculture, Agri-business (Poultry & Dairy), Agro farming,
Leather(Tannery), Fisheries, Textile and Apparels, Renewable Energy, Pulp and Paper,
Sugar and distilleries, Construction and Housing, Engineering and Basic Metal,
Chemicals (Fertilizers, Pesticides and Pharmaceuticals), Rubber and Plastic Industry,
Hospital/Clinic, Chemical Trading, Brick Manufacturing, Ship breaking etc.

2.2 Green Strategic Planning
A bank should determine green targets to be attained through strategic planning. Bank
should determine a set of achievable targets and strategies, and disclose these in their
annual reports and websites for green financing and in-house environment management
as well. For in-house environment management, the target areas should cover attaining
energy efficiency in the form of the use of renewable energy, reduction of electricity,
gas, and petrol consumption, reduction of Green House Gas(GHG) emissions, issuance
of e-statements, electronic bill pay, saving papers, environment friendly office buildings
etc. For Green Financing, the target areas should cover reducing loans for certain
environmentally harmful activities, attaining a particular percentage of environmental
loans as percentage of total, introducing eco-friendly financial products etc.

2.3 Setting up Green Branches

A Green Branch should be featured by the provision of the maximum use of natural light,
use of renewable energy, use of energy saving bulbs and other equipments, reduced water
and electricity use, use of recycled water etc. Such a branch of a bank would be
specifically designated as a ‘Green Branch’. A Green Branch will be entitled to display a
special logo approved by Bangladesh Bank. The criteria for certification of a ‘Green
Branch’ will be circulated by Bangladesh Bank in due course of time.

2.4 Improved In-house Environment Management
Strategy of reuse, recycling of materials and equipments, and source reduction and waste
minimization strategy should be part of in-house environmental management in Phase-II.
Banks should increasingly rely on virtual meeting through the use of video conferencing
in lieu of physical travel which would help saving cost and energy.

contd……..p/5

--- Page 5 ---
2.5 Formulation of Bank Specific Environmental Risk Management Plan and
Guidelines
A bank should develop and follow an environmental risk management manual or
guidelines in their assessment and monitoring of project and working capital loans. In
addition to the compliance of national regulation the bank may set internationally
accepted higher environmental standards. In this connection, Green initiatives by a group
of banks will not only be effective but will also offer competitive advantage. Bank
alliances may prepare standard and guidelines for themselves for improving Green
Banking practices.
2.6 Rigorous Programs to Educate Clients

Clients and business houses should be encouraged and influenced to comply with the
environmental regulations and undertake resource efficient and environmental activities.
Banks should introduce rigorous programs to educate clients.
2.7 Disclosure and Reporting of Green Banking Activities
Banks should start publishing independent Green Banking and Sustainability reports
showing past performances, current activities, and future initiatives. Updated and detailed
information about banks environmental activities and performances of major clients
should be disclosed.
3. Phase-III:
A system of Environmental Management should be in place in a bank before the
initiation of the activities of Phase-III. Banks are expected to address the whole
eco-system through environment friendly initiatives and introducing innovative products.
Standard environmental reporting with external verification should be part of the phase.
The time lining for the actions to be taken under Phase-III should not exceed December
31, 2013.

3.1 Designing and Introducing Innovative Products
Alongside avoiding negative impacts on environment through banking activities, banks
are expected to introduce environment friendly innovative green products to address the
core environmental challenges of the country.
3.2 Reporting in Standard Format with External Verification
Banks should publish independent Green Annual Report following internationally
accepted format like Global Reporting Initiatives (GRI) targeting their stakeholders.
There should be arrangement for verification of these publications by an independent
agency or acceptable third party.

4. Reporting Green Banking Practices on Quarterly Basis

Banks shall report their initiatives/activities under the said program to the Department of
Off-site Supervision of Bangladesh Bank on quarterly basis. Banks shall submit their first
quarterly report on June 30, 2011 basis within July 15, 2011 and similarly they will be
required to continue to submit reports on the subsequent quarters within the next 15 days
of the respective quarter end.

Banks shall keep their annual report and websites updated with the disclosures on green
banking initiatives/activities.
contd……..p/6

--- Page 6 ---
5. The compliant banks practicing Green Banking will have the following
preferential treatments:

(i) BB will award points to banks on Management component while computing
CAMELS rating where there will ultimately be a positive impact on overall rating
of a bank.

(ii) BB will declare the names of the Top Ten Banks for their overall performance
in green banking activities in the BB websites.

(iii) BB will actively consider green banking activities/practices of a bank while
according permission for opening new bank branch.


Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours sincerely,


(K.M. Abdul Wadood)
General Manager
Phone: 7117825