--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 3
Website: www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
30 November 2011
BRPD Circular No. 10





Dated :­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­
16 Aughrayan 1418
Chief Executives
All scheduled banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir:
Guidelines for banking services at customer premises
It has been observed that a number of banks are offering different banking services like, cash
pickup and delivery under their own schemes, at the premises of customers in an attempt to fulfill
genuine customer needs. For the sake of transparency in respect of the rights and obligations of
customers, uniformity in approaches and putting proper risk management tools in place, it is felt
that some general principles and broad parameters should be followed by banks while offering
these services. Banks, therefore, are advised to prepare schemes for offering pickup and delivery
services to their customers, in accordance with the guidelines enumerated in this circular.

1.SERVICES : Banks can offer the following services to their following class of customers at their
premises by executing contract with them :
a) Corporate, Government and Public Sector Customers:
I. Pickup of cash and instruments;
II. Delivery of cash against cheques received at the bank counter;
III. Delivery of instruments.
b) Individual Customers:
I. Pickup of cash and instruments;
II. Delivery of instruments.
2. SERVICE PROVIDERS. In addition to its’ own employees, banks may provide pickup and
delivery services through Agents at customer premises. Where banks engage agents for
delivery of services, it should be ensured that all key risks in outsourcing like Operational Risk,
Contractual Risk, Legal Risk, Compliance Risk, Reputation Risk, etc. are properly addressed,
since the failure of a service provider in providing a specified service, a breach in
security/confidentiality, or non‐compliance with legal and regulatory requirements can lead to
financial losses or loss of reputation for the bank.
3. SERVICE PROCESS. As a general rule, pickup and delivery process shall follow the following :
a) To be serviced during regular banking hours and days only.
b) Pick‐up or delivery of cash shall be made using armoured cars, non‐armoured cars can also
be used provided these are equipped with dual control safe and supported with adequate
security back‐up.
c) Strictest measure of safeguards, control and confidentiality shall be adopted in providing
the services.
d) Record/log book for each vehicle containing pick‐up and delivery activities shall be
maintained by the bank signed by a responsible officer of the bank.
e) Cash/instrument collection from the customer shall be duly acknowledged through a
receipt on behalf of the bank.
f) In case of cash collection, customer’s account shall be credited on the same day; if the
collected cash reaches at bank counter after banking hours, it shall be credited within the
first business hour of next working day.
g) Delivery of demand drafts/pay orders shall be done by debit to the account on the basis of
cheque received or against cash received at the bank and not against cash or instruments
to be collected at the customer premises.

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 3
h) Cash delivery services may be offered to the Corporate Clients, Government Departments
or Public Sector Enterprises against receipt of cheques only at the bank. No such facility,
however, shall be made available to individual customers except, through special
agricultural credit disbursement programs. No cash delivery service against any kind of
telephonic, electronic or faxed request can be made except in case of mobile banking or any
such online banking solutions .
i) To reduce the risk in the cash pickup and delivery services must be adequately covered by
insurance.
4. LIABILITY FOR THE SERVICES. The agreement entered into with the customer shall clearly
state that the services do not entail any legal or financial liability on the bank for failure to offer
pick‐up and delivery services under circumstances beyond its control. The services are a mere
extension of banking services offered at the bank branch and the liability of the bank shall be
the same as if the transactions were conducted at the bank branch.
5. TRANSPARENCY. Charges to be imposed on the customer for pickup and delivery services
shall be clearly stated in the agreement entered into with the customer. The charges should be
prominently indicated on brochures offering pickup and delivery services and must be
disclosed on bank's web‐sites as laid down in BRPD Circular 19/2009, dated 22/12/2009.
6. OTHER CONDITIONS. Pickup and delivery services shall be offered to only those customers in
whose case proper KYC procedures, as laid down in Circular/Direction/Guideline of Anti‐
Money Laundering Department. In addition :
a) The services shall be offered at either the residence or office/factory of the customer, the
address of which should be clearly and explicitly mentioned in the agreement.
b) The agreement with the customer shall clearly specify that the bank will be responsible for
the acts of omission and commission of its ‘agent’.
c) The bank shall avoid discrimination, so far as possible, providing these services and in
collecting service charge from any particular client/customer within a class of customers.
d) The bank may coordinate the movements of the pickup and delivery vehicles with the law
enforcing agencies to the extent possible.
e) The bank has to prepare a separate guideline enumerating the selection of clients, service
charges, employing agent, qualification and experience of agent, limit of cash pickup and
delivery etc. duly approved by Board of directors ( competent authority in case of foreign
banks) of the bank.
f) The bank shall not establish booth/counter for providing the services at the customer
premises.
7. REDRESSING GRIEVANCE. Banks are advised to constitute an appropriate Grievance
Redressing Mechanism for attending complaints about services rendered by its ‘agents’. The
name and telephone number of the designated officer of the bank should be made available to
the customers.
8. Prior approval of Bangladesh Bank is not required before banks can engage in pickup and
delivery services at customers’ premises, provided the conditions mentioned above are
complied with.

Please acknowledge receipt. Sincerely,


(K.M. Abdul Wadood)
General Manager
Phone: 7117825