--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bb.org.bd
Department of Off-Site Supervision
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka


8 October, 2018
DOS Circular No. 04 Date: -----------------------
23 Ashwin , 1425

Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,

Risk Management Guidelines for banks

Please refer to DOS circular no.02 dated February 15, 2012 and DOS circular letter no.13 dated September 9,
2015 on the captioned subject.

Bangladesh Bank (BB) has continued its effort for upgrading the initiatives taken to manage various risks of
banks in a prudent manner. Meanwhile, core risk management guidelines and other risk related guidelines
have been revised. Moreover, modification of the prudential regulations is done on regular basis. As part of
this endeavor, the previous guideline has been revised for ensuring sound risk management culture effectively
in the banks and all scheduled banks are hereby instructed to follow the attached 'Risk Management Guidelines
for Banks'. Each bank shall prepare a comprehensive risk management guideline following this latest one and
considering its nature, size and complexities of business activities, get it approved by the board and shall
submit a copy to the Department of Off-site Supervision (DOS) for information. The bank shall review the
guideline at least once a year for adapting with the changing environment. Besides, banks shall reconstruct its
risk management organogram and appoint Chief Risk Officer (CRO) as the head of Risk Management
Department (RMD) following the instructions of the revised risk management guidelines issued by BB. For
ensuring proper identification, measurement, timely treatment of risks and implementation of the said
guideline, the banks are also instructed to submit the following reports to DOS of BB within the stipulated
time frame :-

1. Soft copies of risk management reports (CRMR prepared for June & December and MRMR for all other
months) for successive months of each quarter along with the minutes of monthly Executive Risk
Management Committee (ERMC) meeting within the next month of the reporting quarter;


2. Board Risk Management Committee(BRMC) meeting minutes within 7 days of the meeting held;


3. Board approved Risk Appetite Statement (RAS ) on yearly basis within first two months of the year;

4. A soft copy of Stress Test report on half yearly basis along with CRMR;

5. A review report of Risk Management Policies and effectiveness of risk management functions with the
approval of the board of directors by the end of 2nd month following the end of each year.


Instructions of DOS circular No.02 dated February 15, 2012 and DOS circular letter no.13 dated September 9,
2015 hereby stand superseded by this circular.

This circular along with the guidelines are available on the website of Bangladesh Bank and shall come into
force with immediate effect.

Yours sincerely,

Enclosure: As above Sd./-



(Md. Sirajul Islam)
General Manager (Current charge)
Phone: 9530081

--- Page 2 ---
Risk Management Guidelines for Banks

October 2018









Department of Off-site Supervision
Bangladesh Bank

--- Page 3 ---
ii

Preamble

Taking risk is an integral part of financial intermediation and banking business. Failure
to assess and manage risks adequately may lead to losses endangering the soundness of
individual financial institutions and affecting the stability of the overall financial
system.

The banking sector throughout the world underwent a vulnerable situation due to recent
global financial crisis. Developing countries like Bangladesh were also affected in the
aftermath of the global financial crisis. Consequently, poverty and human inequality
increased significantly around the world as well as the indicators of human resources
development also deteriorated. Weak risk management, though cannot be considered as a
specific trigger for the financial crisis, has been identified along with weak internal
governance as an underlying factor. Where they existed, sound risk management
practices helped institutions to endure financial crisis significantly better than others.

Relationship between our local banks and internationally recognized banks has expanded
due to increase in foreign trade and commerce. The competition among the banks has
increased and new and complex products/services/technology platform have been
introduced. As a result, risk in the banking industry has increased remarkably as compared
to that of earlier time. It is indispensable to ensure risk management culture/practice at
enterprise level to conduct business successfully with the internationally renowned banks, to
upgrade the banks’ financial soundness indicators to a satisfactory level, and over all, to
maintain financial stability in the banking sector.

The setting of an appropriate strategy and risk tolerance/appetite levels, a holistic risk
management approach and effective reporting lines to the competent authority in its
management and supervisory functions, enables management of banks to take risks
knowingly and treat risks where appropriate. Risk management is a part of internal
governance involving all areas of banks. There is a strong link between good corporate
governance and sound risk management. Without proper risk management, the various
functions in a banking institution cannot work together to achieve the bank’s objectives.
It is an essential part of helping the bank to grow and promote sustainability and resilience.

There is no alternative but to ensure sound risk management practices for surviving in the
competitive environment. Therefore, banks should give greater emphasis on continuous
improvement in risk management, and set their performance goals in line with strategic
planning/objectives. While the extent of risk management function performed and
structure kept in place depend on the size and complexity of individual banks, risk
management is most effective when basic principles and elements of risk management
are applied consistently throughout the financial institution.

Risk management is a discipline at the core of every enterprise and encompasses all
activities that affect its risk profile. However, this function needs not be uniform across
all banks. The definition of a sound or adequate risk management system is ever
changing, as new technology accommodates innovation and better information and as
market efficiency grows. Each banking institution should put in place a comprehensive
risk management program tailored to its needs and the circumstances under which it
operates. In this context, BB has revised previously issued six (06) core risks guidelines to
adapt with the changing banking environment as well as to deal with various risk issues
prudently. Yet risk management in banks should further move from a compliance-driven
function toward a top level comprehensive activity relevant at the highest levels of
decision making and strategy setting.

--- Page 4 ---
iii


Chief Advisor

S. M. Moniruzzaman
Deputy Governor
Bangladesh Bank


Advisor
S. M. Rabiul Hassan
Executive Director
Bangladesh Bank


Coordinator



Md. Arifuzzaman
Deputy General Manager
Bangladesh Bank



Members of Working Committee

Md. Aminur Rahman Chowdhury, Joint Director, Bangladesh Bank
A. N. M. Moinul Kabir, Joint Director, Bangladesh Bank
Jebunnessa Karima, Joint Director, Bangladesh Bank
Mohammad Atiqur Rahaman, Deputy Director, Bangladesh Bank
Shirajum Munira, Deputy Director, Bangladesh Bank
Md. Jahangir Alam, EVP, AB Bank Ltd.
Md. Ashraful Azim, SVP, Shahjalal Islami Bank Ltd.
Pronob Kumar Roy, SAVP, Dutch Bangla Bank Ltd.
Md. Nurul Huda, AGM, Agrani Bank Ltd.
M. Shahed Wali, Sr. Credit Manager, Standard Chartered Bank

--- Page 5 ---
iv

Table of Contents Page
Chapter 1: Objective of Risk Management [1-6]
1.1
Introduction

1.2
Scope of Application

1.3
Objectives

1.4
Dimensions of Risk Management


1.4.1 Risk Culture


1.4.2 Risk Strategy and Risk Appetite


1.4.3 Risk Governance and Organization


1.4.4 Risk Assessment and Treatment


1.4.4.1 Risk Assessment


1.4.4.2 Risk Treatment

Chapter 2: Risk Management System [7-26]
2.1
Elements of a Sound Risk Management System

2.2
Essential Criteria for Ensuring Sound Risk Management

2.3
Board and Senior Management Oversight


2.3.1 Board Oversight


2.3.2 Senior Management Oversight

2.4
Policies, Procedures and Limit Structure

2.5
Risk Measurement, Monitoring and Management Reporting Systems

10
2.6
Internal Controls and Comprehensive Audits

10
2.7
Optimal Risk Management Organogram

11

2.7.1 Role of Board of Directors

12

2.7.2 Role of Board Risk Management Committee (BRMC)

13

2.7.3 Role of Executive Risk Management Committee (ERMC)

14

2.7.4 Chief Risk Officer (CRO)

14

2.7.4.1 Appointment of CRO

15

2.7.4.2 Role of CRO

15

2.7.5 Risk Management Division/Department(RMD)

17

2.7.5.1 Scope of Work of RMD

18

2.7.5.2 Role of RMD

18

2.7.5.3 Desk-wise Functions of RMD

19
2.8
The Concept of Risk Appetite

22

2.8.1 Definition of Risk Appetite

23

2.8.2 Risk Appetite Objectives

23

2.8.3 Risk Appetite Framework

23

2.8.4 Developing Risk Appetite Statement

24

2.8.5 Areas of Risk Appetite

25
Chapter 3: Risk Management Process [27-32]
3.1
Risk Management Process

27
3.2
Steps of Risk Management Process

27
3.3
KRI/Risk Register

32

--- Page 6 ---
Chapter 4: Operational Risk Management [33-44]
4.1
Introduction

33
4.2
Categorization of Operational Risk

34
4.3
Operational Risk Management Framework

37
4.4
Board Oversight

37
4.5
Senior Management Oversight

38
4.6
Policies, Procedures and Limits

38
4.7
Risk Assessment and Quantification

39
4.8
Mitigation of Risks

40
4.9
Risk Monitoring

41
4.10 Risk Reporting

42
4.11 Establishing Control Mechanism

42
4.12 Contingency Planning

43
4.13 Internal Controls

43
Chapter 5: Capital Management [45-47]
5.1
Capital Management and Its Relationship with Risk Management

45
5.2
Framework of Capital Management

45

5.2.1 Roles and Responsibilities of Board of Directors and Senior Management
46
Chapter 6: Risk Management Reporting 48
6.1
Risk Management Reporting

48
6.2
Penalty for Non-Compliance

48
Glossary

49
Bibliography

49

--- Page 7 ---
vi

List of Acronyms
ADR
Advance Deposit Ratio
ALCO
Asset-Liability Management Committee
ALM
Asset Liability Management
BB

Bangladesh Bank
BCBS
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
BIS

Bank for International Settlements
BOD
Board of Directors
BIU

Basel Implementation Unit
BRMC
Board Risk Management Committee
CCD
Central Compliance Department
CRAR
Capital to Risk Weighted Asset Ratio
BCP

Basel Core Principles
CRO

Chief Risk Officer
CRR

Cash Reserve Ratio
ERMC Executive Risk Management Committee
ICAAP
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process
MCO
Maximum Cumulative Outflow
MIS

Management Information System
OBS

Off-Balance Sheet
RAF

Risk Appetite Framework
RAS Risk Appetite Statement
RMD
Risk Management Division/Department
RWA
Risk Weighted Asset
SLEPT
Socio-cultural, Legal, Economic, Political and Technological analysis
SLR

Statutory Liquidity Requirement
SLP

Structural Liquidity Profile
SWOT
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities & Threats analysis
VaR

Value at Risk
WBG
Wholesale Borrowing Guidelines

--- Page 8 ---
Chapter 1
Objective of Risk Management


1.1 Introduction

This guideline is issued by Bangladesh Bank (BB) under section 45 of the Bank Company Ain,
1991 with a view to providing a structured way of identifying and analyzing potential risks,
and devising and implementing responses appropriate to their impact. These responses
generally draw on strategies of risk prevention, risk transfer, impact mitigation or risk
acceptance.

This guideline is prepared in line with internationally accepted risk management principles
and best practices. The guideline is also aligned with the revised version of Basel Core
Principles (BCP) for Effective Banking Supervision published by the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision (BCBS) in September 2012. The BCP on 'Risk Management Processes'
(CP15) requires that banks have a comprehensive risk management process (including
effective board and senior management oversight) to identify, measure, evaluate, monitor,
report and control or mitigate all material risks on a timely basis and to assess the adequacy
of their capital and liquidity in relation to their risk profile and market and macroeconomic
conditions. The risk management process is commensurate with the risk profile and systemic
importance of the bank. Other relevant CPs touch on Corporate Governance (CP14), Capital
Adequacy (CP16), Credit Risk (CP17), Problem Assets Provisions and Reserves (CP18),
Concentration Risk and Large Exposure Limits (CP19), Market Risk (CP22), Liquidity Risk
(CP24), Operational Risk (CP25), Interest Rate Risk (CP23), Financial Reporting and External
Audit (CP27), Disclosure and Transparency (CP28).

1.2 Scope of Application

The guideline pertains to all scheduled banks (conventional, islamic shariah and islamic
banking branches/windows of conventional banks) operating in Bangladesh.
In issuing the guidelines, Bangladesh Bank intends to provide guidance to all banks on
minimum standards for risk management. These Guidelines are not intended to be so
comprehensive as to cover each aspect of a bank’s risk management activity. A bank may,
depending on its size and complexity, establish a more sophisticated framework than
outlined in this document.

However, Bangladesh Bank considers compulsory for all banks to self-assess their risk
profile and operational context, and customize their risk management architecture and
approach to attain organizational goals while meeting the minimum requirements set out in
the guidelines.

--- Page 9 ---
1.3 Objectives

In publishing the guidelines, the objectives of Bangladesh Bank are:

 To promote better risk culture at all levels of the banks.
 To provide minimum standards for risk management practices.
 To improve financial soundness of individual banks and stability of the overall
financial sector.
 To encourage banks to adopt and implement a sound risk management framework.
 To introduce important risk management tools and techniques for assessment and
necessary treatment of various risks.

1.4 Dimensions of Risk Management
1.4.1 Risk Culture

Every banking institution should develop an integrated and institution-wide risk culture,
based on a full understanding of the risks it faces and how they are managed, considering
risk tolerance and appetite. Since the business of banks involves risk taking, it is fundamental
that risks are appropriately managed. A sound and consistent risk culture throughout a
financial institution is a key element of effective risk management.

A bank should develop its risk culture through policies, examples, communication, and
training of staff regarding their responsibilities for risk. Every member of the bank should be
fully aware of his or her responsibility regarding risk management. Risk management should
not be confined to risk specialists or to control functions. Business and operational units,
under the oversight of the management body, should be primarily responsible for managing
risk on day-to-day basis, considering risk tolerance and risk appetite, and in line with bank’s
risk policies and procedures.

Risk culture and its impact on effective risk management must be a major concern for the
board and senior management. A sound risk culture encourages effective risk management,
promotes sound risk-taking and ensures that risk-taking activities beyond the institution’s
risk appetite are recognized, assessed, reported, and addressed in a timely manner.
Weaknesses in risk culture are often the root cause for occurrence of significant risk events,
financial institution failures, and financial crisis.

The top level of the bank sets the tone for the desired risk culture. The risk culture can be
strengthened through:

 Enabling an open and respectful atmosphere in which employees feel encouraged to
speak up when observing new or excessive risks;

--- Page 10 ---
 Clarifying the range of acceptable risks using an embedded risk appetite statement and
various forms of communication and training; and,
 Aligning incentives with objectives and clarifying how breaches in policies/procedures
will be addressed.

1.4.2 Risk Strategy and Risk Appetite

Risk tolerance and risk appetite are terms often used interchangeably: risk appetite
describes the absolute risks a bank is a priori open to take; while risk tolerance relates to the
actual limits that a bank has set.

A bank’s strategy details the long-term, and in some cases, short-term goals and objectives,
as well as how progress toward their achievement is measured. Along with business goals,
the bank should have risk goals and risk strategies which enable them to achieve the desired
risk profile.

The board of directors sets the strategies and the senior management is responsible for
implementing those strategies and communicating them throughout the organization.

Risk appetite statement plays an important role in cascading the risk strategy down through
the institution. It should include metrics and indicators in relation to specific risk types. The
risk-appetite statement should be well-embedded and be consistent with the bank’s capacity
to take risk, taking into consideration the capital constraints, and potential profit and loss
consequences.

A good practice includes the followings:

 Regular review of risk appetite statement as a formal process;
 Top-down and bottom-up processes to define risk metrics and risk appetite; and,
 Limit systems that are aligned with overall governance so that breaches are quickly flagged
and appropriate counter-measures are taken.

1.4.3 Risk Governance and Organization

Risk governance refers to the structure, rules, processes, and mechanisms by which
decisions about risks are taken and implemented. It covers the questions about what risk
management responsibilities lie at what levels and the ways the board influences risk-
related decisions; and the role, structure, and staffing of risk organization. A good practice in
this dimension is where the board has regular involvement in managing key risk issues, and
risk management responsibilities are proportionate to the risks assumed at a particular
level or unit.

--- Page 11 ---
Risk governance should follow a three-lines-of-defense-model.
The first line of defense provides that the business and operation units of the institution
have in place effective processes to identify, assess, measure, monitor, mitigate, and report
on their risks. Each unit operates in accordance with the risk policies and delegated
mandates. The units are responsible for having skills, operating procedures, systems, and
controls in place to ensure their compliance with risk policies and mandates.
The second line of defense relates to the appropriate Internal Control framework put in
place to ensure effective and efficient operations, including the followings:
 adequate control of risks;
 prudent conduct of business;
 reliability of financial and non-financial information reported or disclosed (both
internally and externally); and,
 compliance with laws, regulations, supervisory requirements, and the institution's
internal policies and procedures.

The Internal Control framework encompasses risk control function and compliance
function, and should cover the whole organization, including the activities of all business,
support, and control units. The risk management unit, headed by a Chief Risk Officer, has the
responsibility for recommending and monitoring the bank’s risk appetite and policies, and
for following up and reporting on risk related issues across all risk types.

The third line of defense consists of the bank’s internal audit which performs independent
periodic reviews of the first two lines of defense, provides assurance and informs strengths
and potential weaknesses of the first two lines.

1.4.4 Risk Assessment and Treatment

The ultimate responsibility for risk assessment lies solely with a bank: it should evaluate its
risks critically and not rely on external assessments.

Risk management process is the systematic application of management policies, procedures
and practices to the assessment, treatment, controlling, and monitoring of risk. The process
should be an integral part of management, be embedded in the culture and practices, and
should be tailored to the business processes of the organization.

Regardless of types of structure kept in place or strategies formulated by the bank, the risk
management process should include proper risk assessment and treatment as described
below.

--- Page 12 ---
1.4.4.1 Risk Assessment

Risk assessment is the overall process of risk identification, analysis, and evaluation. Risk
identification is the starting point for understanding and managing risks and/or crucial
activities. Institutions should identify the nature of risk, sources of risk, cost of risk, areas of
impacts, events, their causes, and their potential consequences. They must recognize and
understand risks that may arise from both existing and new business initiatives. They should
put in place adequate tools and techniques to identify risk because unidentified risks at this
stage will not be included in further analysis.

Risk analysis involves developing an understanding of the risk. It provides an input to risk
evaluation and to decisions on the most appropriate strategies and techniques for risk
treatment. The institution’s risk analysis involves measuring risk by considering
consequences of an unfavorable event and likelihood of such event occurring. Factors that
affect consequences and likelihood should also be identified. Risk analysis can be undertaken
with varying degrees of detail, depending on the nature of risk, severity of risk, and the
information, data and resources available. Analysis should be quantitative and qualitative in
nature. To the maximum possible extent, banks should establish systems/models that
quantify their risks; however, in some risk categories, such as reputational and operational
risks, quantification may be difficult and complex. When it is not possible to quantify risks,
qualitative measures should be adopted to capture those risks.

Risk evaluation is undertaken to assist in making decisions, based upon the outcomes of risk
analysis, about which risks need treatment and the priority for treatment implementation.
Some risks need to be immediately addressed and should be brought to the attention of the
competent authority promptly. Risk evaluation mainly involves comparing the level of risk
found during the analysis process with the bank’s risk appetite, risk tolerance level and
regulatory limits. Based on this comparison, the need for appropriate treatment should be
considered.

1.4.4.2 Risk Treatment

After the exposed risks are assessed, banks should choose the best option to eliminate or
mitigate unacceptable risks. Risk treatment options are not necessarily mutually exclusive or
appropriate in all circumstances. The options can include the following and can be applied
either individually or in combination:

 Avoiding the risk by deciding not to start or continue the activity that gives rise to the
risk.
 Accepting and retaining the risk by making informed decision and having plans for
managing and funding the consequences of the risk if it occurs.

--- Page 13 ---
 Reducing the likelihood of the risk through staff training, changing procedures, or by
reducing the impact through diversifying credit portfolio, setting up off-site data backup
etc.
 Sharing the risk with another party or parties through insurance, consortium financing,
etc.

Selecting the most appropriate risk treatment option involves balancing the costs and efforts
of implementation against the benefits derived, regarding legal, regulatory, and other
requirements.

One of the most important ways for banks to address risks is to put in place adequate risk
control mechanisms. The institution should establish and communicate risk limits through
policies, standards and procedures that define responsibilities and authority. These limits
will help the concerned parties knowing when the risk becomes unacceptable and aligning
their actions and behaviors with the institution’s set risk appetite, risk tolerance, and
strategy.

Monitoring and reviewing need to be integral parts of the risk treatment plan to ensure that
measures remain effective. The institution’s monitoring and review processes should
encompass all aspects of risk management process for the purposes of:

 detection of changing risk sources and factors within and outside the institution,
 obtaining further information to improve risk assessment,
 ensuring that controls are effective and efficient in both design and operation,
 analyzing and learning lessons from events, trends etc., and
 identifying emerging risks.

--- Page 14 ---
Chapter 2

Risk Management System

A bank’s risk management system shall include policies, procedures, limits, and controls in
its foundation. This foundation provides adequate, timely, and continuous identification,
assessment, measurement, monitoring, mitigation, and reporting of risks posed by its
activities at the business line and institution-wide levels.

The success of risk management in banks will depend on the effectiveness of the risk
management system providing the foundation and arrangements that are put in place
throughout the organization at all levels. The system should be comprehensive enough to
capture all the material risks to which the institution is exposed. It should facilitate
processes for assessment and necessary treatment of these risks. The minimum standards
of a sound risk management system include the following elements.

2.1 Elements of a Sound Risk Management System

The key elements of a sound risk management system for effective business operations
should encompass the followings:

a) Active involvement of board and senior management;
b) Adequate organization, policies and procedures;
c) Appropriate management information systems; and
d) Comprehensive internal controls and limits.

It should not be understood that risk management functions are only limited to the Risk
Management Division/Department (RMD). Business lines are primarily responsible for the
risks they are taking. Because the line personnel can understand the risks of their activities;
any lack of accountability on their part may hinder sound and effective risk management.

2.2 Essential Criteria for Ensuring Sound Risk Management

For ensuring successful risk management across the organization, the following features
should, at least, be present in the bank:

a) Submission of consolidated report to the board and senior management team
incorporating different types of risks, risk mitigation measures, comparison of risk
levels with limits, the level of capital required for absorbing large losses, and
suggestions for restoring capital;
b) Consistency between the risks taken by the management and the risks perceived by
the board;

--- Page 15 ---
c) Active, firm-wide risk management approach that includes all business lines;
d) Development of in-house expertise relying on various sources/factors including
market data, credit ratings, published analyses, etc.;
e) Alignment of treasury functions with risk management;
f) Active management of contingent liabilities;
g) Use of both firm-specific and market-wide stress scenarios for liquidity management;
h) Efficient and effective management of asset and liability;
i) The stress testing result under consideration to understand the impact of adverse
scenario on the bank’s profitability or capital;
j) Independent risk management function with sufficient authority, logistic support and
continuous communication with business lines;
k) Experienced and expert personnel for performing risk management activities;
l) Importance on the risk management officials’ opinion.

2.3 Board and Senior Management Oversight

The top level authorities of the bank are responsible to ensure the ongoing effectiveness of
the risk management system.

While the overall responsibility for risk management is recognized to rest with the board of
directors, it is the duty of senior management to transform the strategies into operational
policies, procedures, and processes for effective risk management. The senior management
should be fully aware of the activities undertaken by the institution that could expose it to
various risks. It should possess necessary knowledge and skills to be able to align the risk
levels with the board’s strategies through risk assessment and treatment. Top management
should be aware of the bank’s risk profile on an ongoing basis and should regularly report it
to the board or a board level risk committee for review.

2.3.1 Board Oversight

The board of directors has the ultimate responsibility for the risks taken by the bank.
Therefore, it must define the risk appetite, risk tolerance and risk limit, and set risk
strategies. The board is responsible for understanding the nature of risks significant to the
bank and for ensuring that the management is taking necessary steps to implement those
strategies and manage accompanying risks.

To perform the risk oversight role properly, board members shall have a clear understanding
of the types of risks inherent in business lines and take appropriate steps to ensure
continued awareness of any changes in the level of risks. Board shall approve the strategies
and significant risk management policies developed by senior executives and review them on
regular basis. While performing their oversight function, board of directors should not be

--- Page 16 ---
involved in day-to-day activities of risk management. They shall make it clear to the bank’s
management that risk management is not an impediment to the conduct of business nor a
mere supplement to a company’s overall compliance program but is, instead, an integral
component of the company’s strategy, culture and value generation process.

2.3.2 Senior Management Oversight

While the overall responsibility for risk management rests with the board of directors, it is
the responsibility of senior management to transform the strategic directions set by the
board into operational policies, procedures, and processes for effective risk management.
The senior management should be fully aware of the activities undertaken by the bank that
could expose it to various risks. It should possess necessary knowledge and skills to be able
to align the risk levels with the board’s strategies through risk assessment and treatment.
Top management should be aware of the financial institution’s risk profile on an ongoing
basis and should regularly report it to the board or a board level committee for review.

It has to ensure that the policies are embedded in the culture of the bank. It is also
responsible for implementing risk management strategies and policies and ensuring that
procedures are put in place to manage and control the risks in accordance with those
policies keeping in view the strategic direction and risk appetite specified by board. For
effective oversight of risk management, management shall provide the members of the
board with sufficient information to enable them to understand the bank’s risk profile, how
risks are assessed and prioritized by the management team, risk response strategies,
implementation of risk management procedures and infrastructure, and the strength and
weaknesses of the overall system. To serve this purpose, management will oversee the
development, implementation and maintenance of an appropriate Management Information
System (MIS) that identify, measure, monitor and control bank’s various risks. Through
effective communications between the board and senior management, members of the
board should be confident that the bank’s executives understand the risks that the
enterprise faces and are accomplished in their day-to-day management of enterprise risk.
2.4 Policies, Procedures and Limit Structure

The board of directors and senior management must formulate and implement risk
management policies and procedures to deal with various risks that arise from the bank’s
business and operational activities. The bank’s policies and more detailed procedures
should provide guidance for the day-to-day implementation of broad risk strategies, and
generally should include limits designed to shield the institution from imprudent and
unwarranted risks. These policies and procedures include not only those relevant to specific
risk areas like Credit Policy, Liquidity Management Policy, and Operational Risk
Management Policy, but also those related to the overall risk management.

--- Page 17 ---
10

The management should review risk policies, procedures, and limits in a timely manner and
update them when necessary. Further, independent assurance from internal audit about the
efficacy of these policies should also be obtained.

Banks shall consider the following key factors to ensure adequacy of policies, procedures and
limits:

a) Proper documentation of policies, procedures and limits considering the risks
associated with the activity, review and approval by the appropriate internal authority;
b) Assignment of full accountability and delegation of authority in the policies for each
activity and product area; and
c) Development of compliance monitoring procedures incorporating internal compliance
checks for adherence to all policies, procedures and limits by an independent function
within a bank such as an internal control unit.

2.5 Risk Measurement, Monitoring and Management Reporting Systems

Banks shall perform the following key activities to ensure effective risk measurement,
monitoring and management reporting systems:-

a) Identifying and measuring all quantifiable and material risk factors supported by
proper information systems that provide the management with timely and accurate
reports on the financial condition, operating performance and risk exposure of the
bank.

b) Providing regular and sufficiently detailed reports (i.e. types of risk, impact on
business, possible recommendations for mitigation etc.) on risk issues (if any) to line
managers engaged in the day-to-day management of the bank's business operations.
c) Assessing the effectiveness of the risk measurement, monitoring and management
reporting systems considering the adequacy of the risk monitoring practices and
reports addressing all material risks; appropriateness of the key assumptions, data
sources, procedures, analysis and documentation; adaption of changes in business or
products; adequacy of information technology or management information system
environment; consistency in management information reporting and other forms of
communication; compliance with set limits, goals or objectives; adequacy, accuracy
and timeliness of reports to the board and senior management.


2.6 Internal Controls and Comprehensive Audits

Internal control plays a critical role in managing risks of a financial institution. With
comprehensive internal control structure in place, management will be better able to contain

--- Page 18 ---
11

risks within the level commensurate with the institution’s risk appetite, risk tolerance, risk
limit and strategy. An effective internal control system enforces the official lines of authority
and provides for appropriate separation of duties. A major part of the internal control
structure is the establishment of limits such as limits on liquidity, limits on non-performing
assets etc. These limits ensure that the bank’s management does not take excessive risks
while pursuing business targets.
The bank’s internal control system should be adequately tested and reviewed by its internal
audit. The coverage, procedures, and findings of the audit regarding the internal controls
should be adequately reviewed by the Audit Committee and any material weakness found
should be addressed promptly and appropriately.
Banks shall perform the following activities to ensure its internal control environment:

a) Establishing and maintaining an effective system of internal controls, including the
enforcement of official lines of authority and the appropriate segregation of duties.
b) Having a properly structured system of internal controls for promoting effective
operations, providing reliable financial reporting, safeguarding assets and ensuring
compliance with relevant laws, regulations and internal policies.
c) Evaluating the adequacy of the internal control environment considering the
following factors:

i) the appropriateness of the system in relation to the type and level of risks;
ii) clear lines of authority and segregation of duties across the organization;
iii) sufficient independence of the control functions;
iv) the reliability, accuracy and timeliness of all financial, operational and
regulatory reports;
v) the adequacy of procedures for ensuring compliance with applicable laws,
regulations and internal policies and procedures;
vi) review of internal controls and information systems;
vii) adequate documentation of coverage, procedures, findings and management
responses to audits;
viii) appropriate and timely attention to identified material weaknesses and
objective verification and review of management’s actions to correct those
deficiencies.


2.7 Optimal Risk Management Organogram

Below is the organogram that should be followed by all scheduled banks operating in the
country. Each bank is given the flexibility to enhance the organogram according to their size
and complexity. When the banks will formulate their own risk management policy guidelines,

--- Page 19 ---
12


they should name the various desks specifically in the organogram. If the bank wants, they
can give functional designation to the officials according to the risk areas they are assigned
to:




























2.7.1 Role of Board of Directors

The board of directors of the bank shall give utmost importance on sound risk management
practices. They will take every possible initiative to keep various risks (credit, market,
liquidity, operational risks etc.) within tolerable level. For this purpose the board will play
the following roles:

a) Establishing organizational structure for enterprise risk management within the bank
and ensuring that top management as well as staffs responsible for risk management
possess sound expertise and knowledge to accomplish the risk management function
properly;
b) Assigning sufficient authority and responsibility to risk management related officials;
c) Ensuring uninterrupted information flow to RMD for sound risk management;



Chief Risk Officer (CRO)
(Head of RMD)
Desk-4
Desk-3
Desk-5

Board Risk Management
Committee (BRMC)
Board of Directors
Executive Risk
Management
Committee
(ERMC)
Desk-1
Desk-2
Basel
Implementation
Unit

CEO/MD

--- Page 20 ---
13


d) Continuously monitoring the bank's performance and overall risk profile through
reviewing various reports;
e) Ensuring the formulation, review (at least annually) and implementation of
appropriate policies, plans and procedures for risk management;
f) Defining and reviewing the risk appetite, risk tolerance, limit etc. in line with strategic
planning;
g) Making sure maintenance of adequate capital and provision to absorb losses resulting
from risk;
h) Ensuring that internal audit reviews the credit operations, foreign exchange
operations and securities portfolio management functions etc. to assess the
effectiveness of internal control system;
i) Monitoring the function of Board Risk Management Committee.

2.7.2 Role of Board Risk Management Committee (BRMC) in addition to but not
excluding the role defined in the related BRPD circular

a) Formulating and reviewing (at least annually) risk management policies and
strategies for sound risk management;
b) Monitoring implementation of risk management policies & process to ensure effective
prevention and control measures;
c) Ensuring construction of adequate organizational structure for managing risks within
the bank;
d) Supervising the activities of Executive Risk Management Committee (ERMC);
e) Ensuring compliance of BB instructions regarding implementation of core risk
management;
f) Ensuring formulation and review of risk appetite, limits and recommending these to
board of directors for their review and approval;
g) Approving adequate record keeping & reporting system and ensuring its proper use;
h) Holding at least 4 meetings in a year (preferably one meeting in every quarter) and
more if deemed necessary;
i) Analyzing all existing and probable risk issues in the meeting, taking appropriate
decisions for risk mitigation, incorporating the same in the meeting minutes and
ensuring follow up of the decisions for proper implementation;
j) Submitting proposal, suggestions & summary of BRMC meetings to board of directors
at least on quarterly basis;
k) Complying with instructions issued from time to time by the regulatory body;
l) Ensuring appropriate knowledge, experience, and expertise of lower-level managers
and staffs involved in risk management;
m) Ensuring sufficient & efficient staff resources for RMD;
n) Establishing standards of ethics and integrity for staffs and enforcing these standards;

--- Page 21 ---
14


o) Assessing overall effectiveness of risk management functions on yearly basis. Banks
are encouraged to preserve video recording of the BRMC meetings for verification by
the team from Bangladesh Bank (DOS) involved in monitoring risk management
activities. The team may meet the members of BRMC and ERMC of the bank from time
to time to get a closer perspective of risk management culture and practice.

2.7.3 Role of Executive Risk Management Committee (ERMC)

Bank shall form ERMC comprising of CRO (as the Chairman), Head of ICC, CRM/CAD,
Treasury, AML, ICT, ID, Operation, Business, Finance, Recovery and Head of any other
department related to risk if deemed necessary. RMD will act as secretariat of the committee.
The ERMC, from time to time, may invite top management (CEO, AMD, DMD, Country heads
or senior most executives), to attend the meetings so that they are well aware of risk
management process. The responsibilities/Terms of Reference of ERMC will include, but
limited to:
a) Identifying, measuring and managing bank’s existing and potential risks through
detailed risk analysis;
b) Holding meeting at least once in a month based on the findings of risk reports and
taking appropriate decisions to minimize/control risks;
c) Ensuring incorporation of all the decisions in the meeting minutes with proper
dissemination of responsibilities to concerned divisions/departments;
d) Minimizing/controlling risks through ensuring proper implementation of the
decisions;
e) Reviewing risks involved in new products and activities and ensuring that the risks
can be measured, monitored, and controlled adequately;
f) Submitting proposals, suggestions & summary of ERMC meetings to CEO, BRMC on
regular basis;
g) Implementing the decisions of BRMC and board meetings regarding risk issues;
h) Assessing requirement of adequate capital in line with the risk exposures and
ensuring maintenance of the same through persuading senior management and
board;
i) Determining risk appetite, limits in line with strategic planning through threadbare
discussions among the members;
j) Contributing to formulation of risk policies for business units;
k) Handling “critical risks” (risks that require follow-up and further reporting);
l) Following up reviews and reports from BB and informing BRMC the issues affecting
the bank’s operation;
m) Ensuring arrangement of Annual Risk Conference in the bank.

2.7.4 Chief Risk Officer (CRO)
In banking institution, the Chief Risk Officer (CRO) is responsible for ensuring intense and
effective risk management across the organization. The CRO works to ensure that the bank is

--- Page 22 ---
15


compliant with rules, regulations, and reviews factors that could negatively affect the bank’s
objectives. According to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, CRO has been referred
as
an
independent
senior
executive
with
distinct
responsibility
for
the
risk
management function and the institution's comprehensive risk management framework
across the entire organization.

2.7.4.1 Appointment of CRO

Bank shall appoint Chief Risk Officer (CRO) who will act as the head of Risk Management
Department. Appointment, dismissal and other changes to the CRO position should be
approved by the board or its risk management committee. If the CRO is removed from
his/her position, this should be disclosed publicly. The bank should also discuss the reasons
for such removal with its supervisor. CRO’s performance and compensation should be
reviewed and approved by the board or its risk management committee.

Bank shall consider the following criteria as a minimum for appointing CRO:

Senior executive having mainstream banking experience preferably covering
Core risk management
ii.
Internal Control and Compliance
iii.
Capital management
iv.
Branch banking
Core banking system
vi.
Risk based certification

Minimum three years hands on working experience in risk management
The position of the CRO should be one grade higher than or at-least equal to the
heads of other departments for effective risk management.

2.7.4.2 Role of CRO

To bring better transparency, synergy and prudence into risk management structure in the
bank, the role and responsibilities of the CRO is of paramount significance. The CRO leading
the independent risk management department shall have sufficient stature, authority and
seniority. He or she shall have direct access to the board of directors and make direct reports
to the board or its Risk Management Committee. He or she is to be directly supervised by the
Board Risk Management Committee (BRMC). CRO should not have any reporting
relationships with business verticals of the bank and should not be given any business
targets. CRO shall provide all the key risk issues prevailing in the bank to BRMC meetings and
a copy to the CEO for acknowledgement. The CRO must have access to any information
necessary for performing his/her duties. In this context board and CEO/MD will provide full
support to him/her.

--- Page 23 ---
16


CRO of a bank shall undertake the following responsibilities, but not limited to, in order to
ensure transparency in managing risks at all levels:

 To oversee the development and implementation of the bank’s risk management
functions as a primary role;
 To support the Board of Directors/Board’s Risk Management Committee in its
development of the bank’s risk appetite and for translating the risk appetite into a risk
limits structure;
 To actively engage with the management in the process of setting risk appetite and
limits for the various business lines with a view to achieve bank’s overall strategic
planning and monitoring their performance relative to risk-taking and limit
adherence;
 To contribute and participate in key decision-making processes (i.e. strategic
planning, capital and liquidity planning, new products and services, compensation
design and operation);
 To manage the implementation of all aspects of the risk function, including
implementation of processes, tools and systems to identify, measure, manage, monitor
and report risks;
 To assist in the development of and manage processes to identify and
evaluate business risks and control them;
 To manage the process for developing risk management policies and procedures, risk
limits and approval authorities;
 To monitor major and critical risk issues independently with full empowerment;
 To communicate views of the board and senior management throughout the bank;
 To adopt proper financial protection measures through risk transfer, risk avoidance,
and risk retention programs;
 To provide opinion regarding extent of risk in case of credit proposal for big amounts
(to be set by the bank) before submission to EC/board for sanctioning;
 To monitor portfolio health and ensure good quality asset growth;
 To ensure proper compliance of BB’s recommendations regarding risk issues
including all core risks;
 To provide a methodology to identify and analyze the financial impact of loss to the
organization, employees, the public, and the environment;
 To disseminate information and strategies to personnel regarding emerging risk
issues and industry specific risks;
 To implement environmental and social (E&S) safeguard for the asset portfolio;
 To oversee the information security aspects for the bank;
 To ensure arrangement of ERMC meeting on monthly basis wherein top management
team shall address, discuss and resolve risk issues across the bank;
 To ensure proper disclosure of key performance indicators of the bank via Pillar III of
Basel III accords;

--- Page 24 ---
17

 To remain aligned and acquainted with other countries’ economic and financial
positions;
 To organize Annual Risk Conference (at-least one day-long) with the participation of
all the branch managers and deputy branch managers including the officials related to
risk issues;
 Ensuring adequate internal and external training on risk management issues for
increasing efficiency of RMD officials.

It is to be mentioned that CRO should not be given dual responsibility, more specifically the
responsibility of Chief Operating Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Chief of the internal audit
function or any other function.

2.7.5 Risk Management Division/Department (RMD)

Banks must have an independent full-fledged risk management department/division. The
Risk Management Division/Department (RMD) shall be headed by the Chief Risk Officer
(CRO). It should have separate desks within the risk management department for
overseeing each key risk area. The main functions of the department include, but not limited
to, the followings:
 managing the process for developing risk policies and procedures;
 coordinating with business users/units to prepare functional specifications;
 preparing and forwarding risk reports; and
 assisting in the implementation of all aspects of the risk function.

The risk management function shall be functionally and hierarchically independent from
business and other operation functions. The officials who take and own risks should not be
given responsibility for monitoring and evaluating their risks. Safeguards against conflict of
interest should be put in place to maintain independence of the risk management function.
Sufficient resources should be provided to Risk Management Department where the
personnel possess needed experience and qualifications, including market and product
knowledge and command of risk discipline. Likewise, adequate budget should be allocated
to this function to enable it carry out its crucial function effectively.
According to the business size and nature of activity, the bank will form various desks under
the Risk Management Department to perform its assigned activities. However, necessary
desks under the division should be as follows:

1) Credit Risk
2) Market Risk
3) Liquidity Risk
4) Operational Risk
5) Risk Research and Policy Development

--- Page 25 ---
18


It is noted that there is a negative relationship between capital and bank risk, i.e. when the
capital increases, the bank risk decreases. Hence, there must be a close relationship and
communication between Basel Implementation Unit (BIU) and RMD.


2.7.5.1 Scope of Work of RMD

Involvement of RMD officials limited to risk management related activities
Involvement of RMD in annual budget/strategy meeting
Internal risk assessment (annually)
Access to any information related to risk throughout the bank
Request to ICC Division to conduct audit on any specific issue if deemed necessary
Membership of all important committees like SMT, ALCO, CCD, Credit Risk
Committee, Budget committee, Basel Implementation Committee etc. But RMD’s role
will be only as an observer and to raise flags on risk issues but not be part of
decision making process.


2.7.5.2 Role of RMD

The RMD needs to manage and measure risks on the basis of the bank’s approved risk
parameters independently in line with regulatory requirements. The role of RMD includes,
but not limited to, the followings:

 Collecting and analyzing data/information for identifying risks and making
appropriate recommendations for risk mitigation;
 Preparing risk management reports, arranging monthly meeting of ERMC and
preparing meeting minutes, disseminating the decisions to the concerned
department/divisions, monitoring and follow up of implementation status;
 Ensuring timely submission of risk management reports, meeting minutes,
compliance report and other documents to BB;
 Assisting BRMC/ERMC by providing risk issues that are needed to be addressed;
 Designing bank’s overall risk management strategy;
 Ensuring significant contribution in establishing sophisticated risk management
infrastructure with a sufficiently robust data-base, data architecture and information
technology;
 Conducting, developing and overseeing Stress Testing activity;
 Utilizing the Stress Test result and scenario analysis to better understand potential
risk exposures under a variety of adverse circumstances;
 Developing and testing different models (such as VaR, HHI index, Collection scoring,
Vintage curve etc.), and observe their use for measuring and monitoring risks;

--- Page 26 ---
19


 Assisting senior management in formulating strategic planning considering bank’s
risk exposures and industry as a whole;
 Supporting the board, BRMC and ERMC in formulation, review and approval of the
enterprise-wide risk governance framework which includes the bank’s risk culture,
risk appetite, risk limits, and MAT;
 Monitoring on ongoing basis the risk-taking activities and risk exposures in line with
the board approved risk appetite, risk limit and corresponding capital or liquidity
needs (i.e. capital planning);
 Taking initiatives for interim review of risk appetites on request of other related
departments and informing the board of directors and BRMC time to time about the
status of risk exposures as compared to appetite;
 Establishing an early warning or trigger system for breaches of the bank’s risk
appetite or limits;
 Communicating views of the board and senior management throughout the bank;
 Taking initiatives for establishing enterprise/comprehensive risk management
policies and procedures with the approval of the board;
 Monitoring concerned departments in formulating and reviewing related risk
management policies and procedures;
 Monitoring compliance of irregularities found in core risk inspection reports of BB;
 Adopting proper financial protection measures through risk transfer, risk avoidance,
and risk retention programs;
 Taking appropriate steps to control or mitigate risk exposures and ensure reporting
the same to senior management and BRMC.

RMD of the bank is encouraged to prepare a comparative analysis report on bank’s
gain/loss due to/lack of proper risk management activities and its impact on capital and
send the same to senior management & board of the bank and DOS of BB on yearly basis.


2.7.5.3 Desk-wise Functions of RMD

For smooth functioning of risk management activities, the desks of RMD should commonly
do the following tasks:

All the desks are individually responsible for collecting the related data/information,
progress report of the previously taken decisions of ERMC and BRMC from concerned
divisions/department for proper risk analysis and identification of risks, making appropriate
recommendations, preparing memo on related issues, monitoring and following up of
implementation status of the decisions of meeting minutes, ensuring regulatory compliance
on related issues, assisting in formulation and review of risk appetite and risk related
policies/guidelines. The desks are also responsible for monitoring the associated risks
through concerned department/divisions.

--- Page 27 ---
20


In addition, the desks will perform the following specific tasks:

Credit Risk related desk

 Assisting in formulation and review of credit risk management policies, guidelines,
manual, setting up of credit risk appetite, limit, tolerance, MAT etc. with due
consideration for sector, industry, geographical location, regulatory limits, best
practices, current business and economic conditions;
 Monitoring loan portfolio to ensure good quality asset growth;
 Monitoring credit concentration and ensuring compliance of internal limit;
 Closely monitoring the stressed loans to avoid adverse classification;
 Monitoring and following up overdue loans, SMA loans, NPL, law suit cases, written off
loans, regular accounts with unsatisfactory repayment, loans having excess over limit,
overdue accepted bills, off-balance sheet exposures, forced loans, movement of
adverse classification, collateral against loans, credit rating of borrowers, taken over
loans etc.;
 Using different models for identifying related risks;
 Maintaining liaison with independent internal loan review desk as per revised CRM
guidelines and ensuring its proper functioning.
 Conducting Stress Testing activity to understand shock resilience capacity of the
bank;
 Analyzing Stress Testing report, finding out the vulnerable areas that are needed to be
addressed and accordingly advising the same to senior management and board to
ensure maintenance of adequate capital for absorbing any unforeseen losses.


Market Risk related desk

 Ensuring that the treasury department calculates interest sensitive assets and
liabilities properly for determining the impact of interest rate fluctuation on the
profitability of the bank;
 Measuring interest rate risk of the bank by applying various tools such as sensitivity
analysis, duration gap analysis etc.;
 Monitoring foreign exchange related risk such as exchange rate risk, maintenance of
FX related limits, repatriation of export proceeds, outstanding of overdue accepted
bill, reconciliation of long pending Nostro account transaction etc. through concerned
departments;
 Measuring equity price risk by using various tools like VaR and monitoring the same
to keep market exposure safe and sound;
 Conducting Stress Testing activity to understand shock resilience capacity of the
bank;

--- Page 28 ---
21


 Analyzing Stress Testing report, finding out the vulnerable areas that are needed to be
addressed and accordingly advising the same to senior management and board to
ensure maintenance of adequate capital for absorbing any unforeseen losses.

Liquidity Risk related desk

Treasury is primarily responsible for managing liquidity risk. Since RMD is
responsible for overseeing enterprise level risk, it will ensure proper implementation
of the instructions laid down in the ALM guidelines such as maintenance of regulatory
requirements of liquidity ratios, liquidity forecasting etc. For doing this, the desk will
perform the following activities:

Ensuring that the treasury department prepares Structural Liquidity Profile, projected
sources and uses of fund, statement of total time and demand liabilities and calculates
all regulatory liquidity ratios such as CRR, SLR, ADR, LCR, NSFR, MCO, WBG, Undrawn
Commitment etc.;
Regularly monitoring liquidity ratios, liability concentration, growth of asset and
liability including off-balance sheet items, asset-liability of off-shore banking unit etc.
to manage liquidity risk;
Playing major role in setting liquidity strategy;
Assessing opportunity loss resulted from improper liquidity management;
Conducting Stress Testing activity to understand shock resilience capacity of the bank;
Analyzing Stress Testing report, finding out the vulnerable areas that are needed to be
addressed and accordingly advising the same to senior management and board to
ensure maintenance of adequate capital for absorbing any unforeseen losses.

Operational Risk related desk

Identifying the vulnerable areas related to operational risk in collaboration with ICC
and suggesting the senior management and board to review the existing policies to
prevent recurrences of the unexpected incidents;
Assisting in managing risks related to lapses in people, process and system;
Monitoring unsettled issues (identified fraud/forgeries, major irregularities etc.)
through ICC;
Playing an important role to uphold the reputation of the bank by minimizing
operational risks.


Risk Research and Policy Development desk

 Developing, testing, and using different models (such as VaR, Collection scoring,
Vintage curve etc.) for measuring/assessing risks;

--- Page 29 ---
22




 Reviewing effectiveness of enterprise-wide risk governance framework and
recommending necessary policy measures;
 Conducting research to explore reasons behind concurrence of the identified risks and
suggesting the senior management probable ways to control the same;
 Exploring emerging risks and recommending preventive measures to achieve the
organizational goal;
 Assisting senior management in formulating strategic planning considering bank’s
risk exposures and industry as a whole;
 Preparing a consolidated Risk Appetite Statement (RAS) based on the information
provided by the related divisions/departments;
 Developing the KRI reporting format based on the complexity and size of the bank,
suggesting mitigating measures to concerned departments based on the KRI provided
by them, preparing summary of KRI and submitting the same to BRMC on quarterly
basis.

2.8 The Concept of Risk Appetite

The risk management framework is expected to be developed and applied within an
overarching statement of risk appetite. Risk appetite along with risk tolerance and risk
threshold are to be set and approved by the board. The risk appetite must reflect strategic
planning of the bank which includes shareholder aspirations within the constraints of
regulatory requirements, creditor and legal obligations.

A strategic plan is a document reflecting the mission and strategic goals of a bank, generally
for a period of at least five years. A good strategic plan must be clear, consistent with goals,
flexible, and adjustable to changes in the environment. A bank must have a board approved
strategic plan for ensuring the substantial growth and lead the bank in an efficient and logical
way.

A strategic plan should contain, at least the followings, but not limited to:

a) Analysis of the external environment in which the bank operates, including the SLEPT
(Socio-cultural, Legal, Economic, Political and Technological analysis) analysis;
b) Critical review of the institutional performance including SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, Threats) analysis;
c) Bank’s strategic goals and objectives;
d) Corporate Governance;
e) Compliance with laws and regulations;
f) Strengthening Internal Control & Compliance and Review System;
g) Optimization of operating expenses;

--- Page 30 ---
23



h) Reducing Non-performing loans;
i) Increasing NPL recovery;
j) Deposit growth with a view to optimizing cost of fund;
k) Lending growth with industry and business segment focus;
l) Maintaining adequate capital for absorbing all material losses;
m) Maintaining optimum liquidity;
n) Risk Appetite Statement for all material risks;
o) Human resources development;
p) Automation and effective Management Information System (MIS);
q) Proactive risk management and governance.


2.8.1 Definition of Risk Appetite

Risk appetite is the level and type of risk a bank is able and willing to assume in its exposures
and business activities, given its business objectives and obligations to stakeholders
(depositors, creditors, shareholders, borrowers, regulators). Risk appetite is generally
expressed through both quantitative and qualitative means and should consider extreme
conditions, events, and outcomes. It should be stated in terms of the potential impact on
profitability, capital and liquidity.

2.8.2 Risk Appetite Objectives

In support of the bank’s mission, the risk appetite focuses mainly on the following five
overarching risk management objectives:

 Upholding the highest ethical standards of conduct;
 Preserving the long-term financial resilience of the bank;
 Avoiding losses when investing public money;
 Ensuring compliance with legal and regulatory obligations;
 Maintaining a robust internal control environment and safeguarding operational
continuity.

2.8.3 Risk Appetite Framework

The science of developing and adopting a risk appetite framework (RAF) is still evolving at
banks all over the world. Some banks have adopted a high-level, brief, and qualitative
statement of RAF, while others have made it complex, lengthy, and quantitative. Risk appetite
is the cornerstone of a successful risk management framework.

--- Page 31 ---
24


Risk appetite framework should include the following criteria:

 Be reviewed and approved by the board of directors at least annually;
 Be in line with the organization’s strategy, objectives and key stakeholders’ demands;
 Cover all key risks discussing risk preferences both in terms of risks that are sought
out and risks that should be minimized;
 Clearly document risks as part of a risk register, including risk-specific definitions,
risk owner, how and how often each risk will be measured, assumptions related to
each risk, judgment on severity and likelihood, and speed at which risks could
manifest;
 Recognize that losses occur and are part of business but include loss tolerances that
are reflective of overall business objectives;
 Reflect the human and technological resources needed to measure and manage the
bank’s risks in a timely fashion.

2.8.4 Developing Risk Appetite Statement

Developing a risk appetite statement is a complex endeavor and is both art and science. The
steps in its development include:

 Start with the bank’s overall strategic and financial objectives.
 Consider annual reports and financial statements, regulatory requirements, Peer
group and industry-wise growth, bank’s own portfolio growth, trend of NPL,
profitability and capital, liquidity position, risk management culture and practices etc.
 Determine the bank’s risk profile.
 Set tolerances for exposures and potential losses in consultation with the business
line and related departments.
 Get board approval and communicate it throughout the organization.

• In preparing Risk Appetite Statement (RAS), banks are required to set the loan growth
target in line with its strategic objectives and mention it in both absolute amount and
percentage form. For example, if a bank wants to make 20% loan growth in a
particular year to achieve its strategic planning/objective, it should state the
percentage of loan growth along with increased amount of loans. In this regard, banks
have to mention at least previous three years’ real performance along with the
current year risk appetite, tolerance and limit. The expected loan growth/amount is
also to be distributed in each sector, industry and regional area under the head of Risk
Appetite, Risk Tolerance and Risk Limit/Threshold. Risk appetite should be
measurable and subject to time consideration for periodic review and must have risk
treatments. In case of interim review (if necessary), the revised appetite statement
shall have to be approved by the board of directors and submitted to DOS of BB and
communicated throughout the organization. However, repeated review of risk
appetite statement is discouraged.

--- Page 32 ---
25



2.8.5 Areas of Risk Appetite

Banks shall prepare risk appetite statement covering all regulatory requirements related to
risks, components of pillar II under Basel III, strategic planning and all other probable risks
exist in the bank. For example, in setting appetite for liquidity risks they should look into the
ratios laid down in the ALM guidelines and related circulars issued by BB. In addition, the
banks shall also consider the CRMR report in setting the above limits. Apart from the
regulatory requirements, the banks should set risk appetite, tolerance and limit for all the
probable areas of risks. Possible areas for setting risk appetite are as follows:

 Overall growth of total loans and advances including off-balance sheet item
 Credit concentration (borrower/sector/geographical area wise)
 Gross and net NPL to total loans
 Cash recovery against classified loans/written off loans
 Amount of loan outstanding with acceptable rated customers (ECA score up to 3) to
the amount lies with total rated customers
 Unsecured exposure* to total exposure (funded)
 Rescheduled loans to total classified loans
 Written off loans to total classified loans
 Interest waiver as % of NPL
 Impact on Net Interest Income (NII) due to adverse change in interest rate
 Bucket-wise gap under simple sensitivity analysis for interest rate change
 Exchange rate shock to operating income
 Value at Risk (VAR) for securities and FX
 Overdue accepted bills (payable and receivable) to total loans
 Net Open Position limit
 Exchange rate shock to operating income
 Liability concentration (Top-10 deposit suppliers to total deposit)
 Bucket-wise gap under structural Liquidity Profile (SLP)
 Liquidity ratios (at least for regulatory requirements) including Commitment Limit
and Wholesale Borrowing Guideline (WBG) Limit
 Loss due to overall operational risk
 Loss due to internal and external fraud
 Operational loss due to employment practice and workplace safety, clients, products,
and business practice, damage to physical assets, business disruption and system
failure, execution, delivery and process management

* Unsecured exposure is the exposure against which no eligible collateral (defined by BB) is held.

--- Page 33 ---
26



 Expected operational loss as % of operating income
 Operating expenses to operating income
 CRAR including CRAR after combined minor shock
 Credit rating of bank itself
 CAMELS rating
 Core risks rating
 Regulatory ratios


Banks shall set risk limit for regulatory issues in line with the thresholds laid down by BB but
they are encouraged to apply their own prudence for determining/fixing the
maximum/minimum perimeter for those issues considering their risk taking capacity, risk
management practices etc. For example, bank having trouble with liquidity should follow
more stringent/conservative measure and set the limit for AD ratio below the regulatory
threshold.

--- Page 34 ---
27


Chapter 3

Risk Management Process


3.1 Risk Management Process

Banks shall comply with the latest core risk guidelines and risk management guideline
circulated by BB for effective risk management. They will develop and implement their own
guidelines and various types of risk management tools in consistent with the complexity, size
and nature of business, risk strategy and BB guidelines. The risk strategy should be
determined taking into consideration bank’s capital adequacy, expected level of profitability,
market reputation, adequacy and experienced personnel, logistic support, macro and micro
economic scenario, risk management practices etc. The board of directors, senior
management and other officials of the bank should be aware of and understand their
respective responsibilities within the risk management system.

An effective risk management system includes the implementation of clearly defined policies
and processes to facilitate the identification and quantification of risks inherent in a bank’s
different activities. The policy should be formally established and approved by the board of
directors and should clearly set out the parameters under which different risks are to be
managed/controlled.

3.2 Steps of Risk Management Process

Risk management is an iterative process that, with each cycle, can contribute progressively
to organizational improvement by providing management with a greater insight into risks
and their impact. It is a series of multi-steps that, when undertaken in sequence, enable
continual improvement in decision-making.

Steps of Risk Management Process in a Banking Organization:

Step 1 – Communicate and Consult
Step 2 – Establish the context
Step 3 – Identify the risks
Step 4 – Analyze the risks
Step 5 – Evaluate the risks
Step 6 – Treat the risks
Step 7 – Monitor the risks

Step-1: Communication and Consult
This is preparatory step that aims to identify the responsible persons involved in risk
assessment (including identification, analysis and evaluation) and also the persons engaged
in the treatment, monitoring and review of risk.

--- Page 35 ---
28


In this step, management must communicate the roles, responsibilities, accountabilities of
the internal stake holders. Formation of policies, review/revision, and dissemination of the
policies is also part of this step. Risk owners/originator should be informed of his/her/their
role when dealing with the risks. All the stake holders should be communicated after due
consultation that everybody should inform and notify RMD as and when they identify
something to be noted in the risk register as potential risk to be addressed. This information
to RMD officials should preferably be in black and white or even through e-mail. RMD
officials will then include the item in the risk register.

Step-2: Establishment of the context
This is another preparatory stage that closes to starting the formal risk management process.
Before risk can be clearly understood and dealt with, it is important to understand the
context in which it exists.

The steps to assist establishing the context within which risk will be identified are:
a) Establish the internal context
Under this sub-step, the objectives and goals of a business or activity must first be identified
to ensure that all significant risks are understood. This ensures that risk decisions always
support the broader goals and objectives of the business. This approach encourages long-
term and strategic thinking.

b) Establish the external context
This sub-step defines the overall environment in which the bank operates. An analysis of
these factors will identify the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats to the
business in the external environment. Local and global issues are also important to be
considered.
c) Establish the risk management context
It is important to define the limits, objectives, appetite and scope of the activity or issue
under examination. For example, in conducting a risk analysis for a new product or project
loan, such as the introduction of a new branch, wing of banking business or a new product
line, it is important to clearly identify the parameters for this activity to ensure that all
significant risks are identified.

Step-3: Risk Identification
The next step is to identify possible risks that may affect, either negatively or positively, the
objectives of the business and the activity under analysis. The purpose of this step is to
identify what could go wrong (likelihood) and what is the consequence (loss or damage) of
its occurring.

--- Page 36 ---
29


There are two main ways to identify banking risks:
1. Identifying retrospective risks
Retrospective risks are those that have previously occurred, such as incidents or
accidents.
Methods of identifying retrospective risks include:
 Audit reports
 Various risk reports
 Regular reports
 Hazard or incident logs or registers
 Customer complaints
 Changes in regulations
 Past employee survey/exit interview
 Media reports (print or electronic)
 Bangladesh Bank inspection report

2. Identifying prospective risks
Prospective risks are those that have not yet happened, but might happen sometime in
future.
Methods for identifying prospective risks include:
 Brainstorming with staff or external stakeholders
 Researching the economic scenario (macro or micro both local and global)
 Conducting interviews with the relevant people and/or organizations
 Undertaking surveys of staff or clients to identify anticipated issues or problems
or risks
 Reviewing policy, process, systems

Step -4: Analysis of the risks

The risk analysis step assists in determining which risks have a greater consequence
or impact than others. Thus, analyzing the likelihood and consequences of each
identified risk and deciding which risk factors will potentially have the greatest effect,
it should, therefore, receive priority with regard to how they will be managed. The
level of risk is analyzed by combining estimates of likelihood (table 1) and
consequences (table 2).

It is important to consider the consequences and the likelihood of risk in the context
of the size, complexity, objective of the activity of a banking company is pursuing. It is
important to note that the likelihood/frequency and also the impact/consequence will
vary from bank to bank.

--- Page 37 ---
30


Table 1– Likelihood scale


Rating
LIKELIHOOD
The potential for problems to occur in a year
ALMOST CERTAIN: will probably occur, could occur several times per year
LIKELY: high probability, likely to arise once per year
POSSIBLE: reasonable likelihood that it may arise over a five-year period
UNLIKELY: plausible, could occur over a five to ten year period
RARE: very unlikely but not impossible, unlikely over a ten year period


Table 2 – Loss or damage impact scale


Rating
POTENTIAL IMPACT
In terms of the objectives of the Bank
CATASTROPHIC: most objectives may not be achieved, or several severely
affected
MAJOR: most objectives threatened, or one severely affected
MODERATE: some objectives affected, considerable effort to rectify requires
medical attention and has some impact on overall health of the bank and also
may impact on the economy the bank is operating in
MINOR: easily remedied, with some effort the objectives can be achieved
NEGLIGIBLE: very small impact, rectified by normal processes


Step -5: Evaluation of the risks

Risk evaluation involves comparing the level of risk found during the analysis process
with previously established risk criteria, and deciding whether these risks require
treatment. The result of a risk evaluation is a prioritized list of risks that require
further action. This step is about deciding whether risks are acceptable or need
treatment.

Step-6: Treatment of risks

Risk treatment is about considering options for treating risks, evaluating those
options, preparing the risk treatment plans and implementing those plans to achieve
the desired outcome.

--- Page 38 ---
31


 Options for treatment need to be proportionate to the significance of the risk, and the
cost of treatment commensurate with the potential benefits of treatment. Risk
treatment should also aim to enhance positive outcomes.

 Options for risk treatment

It identifies the following options that may assist in the minimization of negative risk
or an increase in the impact of positive risk.

1. Avoid the risk
2. Change the likelihood of the occurrence
3. Change the consequences
4. Share the risk
5. Retain/Accept the risk supported by the CRAR as per Basel III

In fact, the options are the followings and can be applied either individually or in
combination:

 Avoiding the risk by deciding not to start or continue with the activity that gives rise to
the risk.
 Accepting and retaining the risk by making informed decision and having plans for
managing and funding the consequences of the risk if it occurs.
 Reducing the likelihood of the risk through staff training, changing procedures, or by
reducing the impact through diversifying credit portfolio, setting up off-site data
backup etc.
 Sharing the risk with another party or parties through insurance, consortium financing,
etc.


Step-7: Monitoring and review of risks

Risks need to be monitored periodically to ensure changing circumstances do not
alter the risk priorities. Very few risks will remain static, therefore, the risk
management process needs to be regularly repeated, so that new risks are captured in
the process and effectively managed.

A risk management plan at every business level should be reviewed at least on an
annual basis. An effective way to ensure that is to combine risk planning or risk
review with annual business planning.

Risk management should be fully incorporated into the operational and management
processes at every level of the organization and should be driven from the top down.

--- Page 39 ---
32

3.3 KRI/Risk Register:

The KRI is one of the effective tools for comprehensive risk management that should be
maintained by each bank to identify the key business and financial risks, to define and
implement respective controls/mitigating factors to reduce the risks faced by the bank and
its subsidiaries. Business Line managers shall report the key risks issues to RMD as and when
identified/detected. RMD should review the KRI based on the reports provided by the line
managers, RMD will suggest mitigation measures to concerned units and also submit the
effectiveness of the mitigation measures to BRMC on quarterly basis.

Minimum components of risk register should be as follows:

1. Date: As the risk register is a living document, it is important to record risk
identification date, target date and completion dates for treating risks
2. Risk Number: A unique identifying number of the risk
3. Risk Description: A brief description of the risk, its causes and impact
4. Existing Controls: A brief description of the controls that are currently in place for the
risk
5. Consequence: The consequence (severity or impact) of rating for the risk, using scales
(e.g. 1-5 with 5 being most severe)
6. Likelihood: The likelihood (probability) rating for the risk, using scales (e.g. 1-5, with
5 being most likely)
7. Overall risk score: Determined by multiplying likelihood (probability) times
consequence (Impact) for a scale ranging from 1-25
8. Risk Ranking: A priority list which is determined by the relative ranking of the risk by
their overall risk score
9. Trigger: Something which indicates that a risk is about to occur or has already
occurred
10. Management Action: Action which is to be taken if the risk found adverse
11. Risk Owners: The person(s) for whom the risk is being generated or is supposed to
look after the situation before the risk is generated (mainly business line personnel).

Management of credit, market, liquidity and other risks

In managing credit, market, liquidity and operational risks, banks shall follow the latest core
risk management guidelines on Credit, Foreign Exchange, Asset-Liability (including
appendix), Internal Control & Compliance, ICT Security and Prevention of Money Laundering
and Terrorist Financing.
Banks are encouraged to develop different tools and models for measuring credit, market
and liquidity risks. For example: GINI Coefficient, Herfindahl–Hirschman Index (HHI) for
measuring concentration risk, Credit Risk Modeling for measuring expected loss, Interest
Rate Sensitivity and Duration Analysis for interest rate risk, VaR for equity and FX risk, Stress
Testing for credit, market and liquidity risk, Structural Liquidity Profile for liquidity risk etc.

--- Page 40 ---
33

Chapter 4
Operational Risk Management

4.1 Introduction

Operational risk is defined as the risk of unexpected losses due to physical catastrophe,
technical failure and human error in the operation of a bank, including fraud, failure of
management, internal process errors and unforeseeable external events.

It is clear that operational risk differs from other risks in that it is typically not directly taken
in return for an expected reward, but exists in the natural course of corporate activity, and
that this affects the risk management process. At the same time, failure to properly manage
operational risk can result in a misstatement of a bank’s risk profile and expose the bank to
significant losses.

Operational risk can be subdivided into two components: operational strategic risk and
operational failure risk. It is also defined as internal operational risk.

Operational strategic risk arises from environmental factors such as a new competitor that
changes the business paradigm, a major political and regulatory regime change, and other
factors that are generally outside the control of the bank. It also arises from a major new
strategic initiative, such as getting into a new line of business or redoing how current
business is to be done in the future. It is also defined as external operational risk.

Operational failure risk arises from the potential for failure in the course of operating the
business. A firm uses people, process, and technology to achieve business plans, and any one
of these factors may experience a failure of some kind. Accordingly, operational failure risk is
the risk that exists within the business unit caused by the failure of people, process, systems
or technology. A certain level of the failures may be anticipated and should be built into the
business plan. These failures can be expected to occur periodically, although both their
impact and their frequency may be uncertain.



Operational Risk


Operational strategic risk
The
risk
of
choosing
an
inappropriate strategy in response
to environmental factors, such as

 Political
 Government
 Regulation
 Taxation
 Societal
 Competition, etc.

Operational failure risk
The risk encountered in the
pursuit
of
particular
strategy due to

 People
 Process
 Technology

--- Page 41 ---
34




4.2 Categorization of Operational Risk

Banks are required to adopt and utilize standard categorizations of operational risk events,
according to Event Type and Business Line. Not all Business Lines will be relevant for all
banks. There are seven major Event Types, and eight major (Level 1) Business Lines, and
within each combination of Event Type and Business Line, there may be one or more
Scenario Descriptions. The following list of Scenario Descriptions, categorized by Event Type
and Business Line, represent the largest scenarios most frequently reported by banks. For
any bank, it is unlikely, but possible, that some of the scenarios may occur under business
lines in addition to the ones reported in the table.


Event Type
Business Line
Scenario Descriptions
Type A:
Internal Fraud
Corporate Finance
Loan Fraud
Embezzlement
Failure to follow procedures/limits
Trading & Sales
Unauthorized trading/rogue trader
Misappropriation of assets
Breach of trading limits
Retail Banking
Theft of customer data/information
Embezzlement
Theft of assets
Commercial Banking

Fraudulent transfer of funds
Embezzlement
Theft of customer funds
Payment and Settlement

Payment fraud
Theft of client funds or assets
Asset Management
Unauthorized trading activities
Not allocated to any
business line
Embezzlement
Misuse of confidential information
Misappropriation of assets
Type B:
External Fraud
Corporate Finance
Client misrepresentation of information
Theft
Loan fraud
Trading & Sales
Loan fraud
Cybercrime
Forgery
Retail Banking
Cybercrime
Check fraud
Theft of information/data

--- Page 42 ---
35



Event Type
Business Line
Scenario Descriptions

Commercial Banking
Fraudulent transfer of funds
Credit product fraud (loans, L/C,
guarantees)
Payment and Settlement
Payment fraud
Not allocated to any
business line
Loan fraud
Cybercrime
Robbery
Type C:
Employment
Practices and
Workplace Safety
Trading & Sales
Discrimination
Occupational accident
Retail Banking
Occupational accident
Discrimination
Environmental issue
Not
allocated to any
business line
Pandemic
Wrongful termination
Discrimination
Type D:
Clients, Products,
and
Business
Practices
Corporate Finance
Regulatory breach
Compromised customer information
Fiduciary breach
Trading & Sales
Fiduciary breach
Regulatory breach
Compromised customer information
Retail Banking
Regulatory breach
Mis-selling
Compromised customer information
Commercial Banking
Noncompliance with money laundering
regulations
Regulatory breach
Mis-selling
Asset Management
Mis-selling
Not
allocated to any
business line
Client suitability
Noncompliance with money laundering
regulations
Type E:
Damage to
Physical Assets
Trading & Sales
Business continuity failure
Damage to building and premises
Retail Banking
Fire
Flood
Damage to building and premises

--- Page 43 ---
36




Event Type
Business Line
Scenario Descriptions

Commercial Banking
Damage to building and premises
Natural disaster
Not
allocated to any
business line
Natural disaster
Terrorist attack
Vandalism
Earthquake
Type F:
Business
Disruption and
System Failure
Trading & Sales
IT system failure
Retail Banking
IT system failure
Utility outage
Commercial Banking
Off-shoring/Outsourcing risk
IT system failure
Payment and Settlement
IT system failure
Failure of payments infrastructure
Agency Services
IT system failure
Asset Management
IT system failure
Not allocated to any
business line
IT system failure
Type G:
Execution,
Delivery, and
Process
Management
Corporate Finance
Inaccurate/Incomplete contract
Transaction error
Staff error in lending process
Trading & Sales
Data entry error
Model risk
Retail Banking
Pricing error
Failure of external supplier
Commercial Banking
Failure to follow procedures
Lost or incomplete loan/legal
documentation
Processing error
Collateral management error
Payment and Settlement
Data entry error
Failure to follow procedures
Agency Services
Processing error
Asset Management
Mismanagement of account assets
Not allocated to any
business line
Unapproved access given to client
accounts Inaccurate financial
statement
Failure of supplier/vendor
Tax noncompliance

--- Page 44 ---
37


4.3 Operational Risk Management Framework

An operational risk management framework should be based on an appropriate definition of
operational risk, which clearly articulates what constitutes operational risk in the bank. The
framework should cover the bank’s tolerance for operational risk, as specified through the
policies for managing this risk and the bank’s prioritization of operational risk management
activities, including the extent of, and manner in which, operational risk is transferred
outside the bank. It should also include policies outlining the bank’s approach to identifying,
assessing, monitoring and controlling/mitigating the risk. The degree of formality and
sophistication of the bank’s operational risk management framework should be
commensurate with the bank’s risk profile. There should be separation of responsibilities
and reporting lines between operational risk control functions, business lines and support
functions in order to avoid conflict of interest. The framework should also articulate the key
processes the bank needs to have in place to manage operational risk.
4.4 Board Oversight

The board is responsible for creating an organizational culture that places high priority on
effective operational risk management and adherence to sound operating controls.
Operational risk management is most effective where a bank’s culture emphasizes high
standards of ethical behavior at all levels of the bank. The board should promote an
organizational culture, which establishes through both actions and words the expectations of
integrity for all employees in conducting the business of the bank. Generally, the board
should at least:

a) Establish tolerance level and set strategic direction in relation to operational risk. Such
a strategy should be based on the requirements and obligation to the stakeholders of
the bank;
b) Approve the implementation of a bank-wide framework to explicitly manage
operational risk as a distinct risk to the bank’s safety and soundness;
c) Provide senior management clear guidance and direction regarding the principles
underlying the framework and approve the corresponding policies developed by senior
management;
d) Establish a management structure capable of implementing the bank’s operational risk
management framework specifying clear lines of management responsibility,
accountability and reporting; and
e) Review the operational risk management framework regularly to ensure that the bank
is managing the operational risks. This review process should also aim to assess
industry best practice in operational risk management appropriate for the bank’s
activities, systems and processes.

--- Page 45 ---
38


4.5 Senior Management Oversight

The senior management should at least:

a) Translate the operational risk management framework established by the board into
specific policies, processes and procedures that can be implemented and verified within
different business units;
b) Clearly assign authority, responsibility and reporting relationships to encourage and
maintain this accountability and ensure that the necessary resources are available to
manage operational risk effectively;
c) Assess the appropriateness of the management oversight process in light of the risks
inherent in a business unit’s policy;
d) Ensure that bank activities are conducted by qualified staffs with necessary experience,
technical capabilities and access to resources, and that staffs responsible for monitoring
and enforcing compliance with the bank’s risk policy have authority and are
independent from the units they oversee;
e) Ensure that the bank’s operational risk management policy has been clearly
communicated to staffs at all levels of the organization that are exposed to material
operational risks.

4.6 Policies, Procedures and Limits

Particular attention should be given to the quality of documentation controls and to
transaction-handling practices. Policies, processes and procedures related to advanced
technologies supporting high transaction volumes, in particular, should be well documented
and disseminated to all relevant personnel.

The bank should put in place an operational risk management policy. The policy should
include at least, but not limited to, the followings:

a) The strategy given by the board of the bank;
b) The systems and procedures to set up effective operational risk management
framework; and
c) The structure of operational risk management function and the roles and
responsibilities of individuals involved.

The policy should establish a process to ensure that any new or changed activity, such as new
products or systems conversions, will be evaluated for operational risk prior to coming into
effect. It should be approved by the board and documented. Senior management should
ensure that it is clearly communicated and understood to staffs at all levels in units that are

--- Page 46 ---
39

exposed to material operational risks. Senior management also needs to place proper
monitoring and control processes in order to have effective implementation of the policy.
The policy should be regularly reviewed and updated, to ensure it continues to reflect the
environment within which the bank operates.

Banks should also establish policies for managing the risks associated with outsourcing
activities. Outsourcing activities can reduce the bank’s risk profile by transferring activities
to others with greater expertise and scale to manage the risks associated with specialized
business activities. However, a bank’s use of third parties does not diminish the
responsibility of the board and senior management to ensure that the third-party activity is
conducted in a safe and sound manner and in compliance with applicable laws. Outsourcing
arrangements should be based on robust contracts and/or service level agreements that
ensure a clear allocation of responsibilities between external service providers and the
outsourcing institution. Furthermore, banks need to manage residual risks associated with
outsourcing arrangements, including disruption of services. Firms that utilize third-party
vendors to provide services with which customers come into direct contact (such as a
partnership with a mobile network operator to allow customers to transfer funds via SMS)
need to exercise caution so that service interruptions do not damage the reputation of the
bank.

4.7 Risk Assessment and Quantification

Banks should identify and assess the operational risk inherent in all material products,
activities, processes and systems and its vulnerability to these risks. Banks should also
ensure that before new products, activities, processes and systems are introduced or
undertaken, the operational risk inherent in them is subject to adequate assessment
procedures. While a number of techniques are evolving, operating risk remains the most
difficult risk category to quantify. It would not be feasible at the moment to expect banks to
develop such measures. However, the banks could systematically track and record frequency,
severity and other information on individual loss events. Such data could provide meaningful
information for assessing the bank’s exposure to operational risk and developing a policy to
mitigate/control that risk.

Effective risk assessment allows the bank to better understand its risk profile and most
effectively target risk management resources. Amongst the possible tools that may be used
by banks for identifying and assessing operational risk are:

(a) Self risk assessment: A bank assesses its operations and activities against a menu of
potential operational risk vulnerabilities. This process is internally driven and should
be based on approved checklists to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the
operational risk environment.

--- Page 47 ---
40



(b) Risk mapping: In this process, various business units, organizational functions or
process flows are mapped by risk type. This exercise can reveal areas of weakness and
help prioritize subsequent management actions.

(c) Risk indicators: Risk indicators are statistics and/or metrics, often financial, which can
provide insight into a bank’s risk position. These indicators are to be reviewed on a
periodic basis (such as monthly or quarterly) to alert banks to changes that may be
indicative of risk concerns. Such indicators may include the number of failed trades,
staff turnover rates and the frequency and/or severity of errors and omissions.
Threshold/limits could be tied to these indicators such that when exceeded, could alert
management on areas of potential problems.

(d) Historical data analyses: The use of data on a bank’s historical loss experience could
provide meaningful information for assessing the bank’s exposure to operational risk
and developing a policy to mitigate/control the risk. An effective way of making good
use of this information is to establish a framework for systematically tracking and
recording the frequency, severity and other relevant information on individual loss
events. Banks may also combine internal loss data with external loss data (from other
banks), scenario analyses, and risk assessment factors.

4.8 Mitigation of Risks

Some significant operational risks have low probabilities but potentially very large financial
impact. Moreover, not all risk events can be controlled, e.g. natural disasters. Risk mitigation
tools or programs can be used to reduce the exposure to, or frequency and/or severity of
such events. For example, insurance policies can be used to externalize the risk of “low
frequency, high severity” losses which may occur as a result of events such as third-party
claims resulting from errors and omissions, physical loss of securities, employee or third-
party fraud, and natural disasters.

However, banks should view risk mitigation tools as complementary to, rather than a
replacement for, thorough internal operational risk control. Having mechanisms in place to
quickly recognize and rectify legitimate operational risk errors can greatly reduce exposures.
Careful consideration also needs to be given to the extent to which risk mitigation tools such
as insurance truly reduce risk, or transfer the risk to another business sector or area, or even
create a new risk e.g. legal or counterparty risk.

Investments in appropriate processing technology and information technology security are
also important for risk mitigation. However, banks should be aware that increased
automation could transform high-frequency, low-severity losses into low-frequency, high-
severity losses.

--- Page 48 ---
41

The later may be associated with loss or extended disruption of services caused by internal
factors or by factors beyond the bank’s immediate control, e.g. external events. Such
problems may cause serious difficulties for banks and could jeopardize a bank’s ability to
conduct key business activities. Banks should, therefore, establish disaster recovery and
business continuity plans that address this risk.

4.9 Risk Monitoring

An effective monitoring process is essential for adequately managing operational risk.
Regular monitoring activities help quickly detecting and correcting deficiencies in the
policies, processes and procedures for managing operational risk. Promptly detecting and
addressing these deficiencies can substantially reduce the potential frequency and/or
severity of a loss event. There should be regular reporting of pertinent information to senior
management and the board that supports the proactive management of operational risk.
Senior management should establish a program to:

a) Monitor assessment of all types of operational risk faced by the bank;
b) Assess the quality and appropriateness of mitigating actions, review effectiveness of
the same periodically; and
c) Ensure that adequate controls and systems are in place to identify and address
problems before they become major concerns.

It is essential that:

i. Responsibility for the monitoring and controlling of operational risk should follow the
same type of organizational structure that has been adopted for other risks, including
market and credit risk;
ii. Senior management ensure that an agreed definition of operational risk together with
a mechanism for monitoring, assessing and reporting is designed and implemented;
and
iii. This mechanism should be appropriate to the scale of risk and activity undertaken.

In addition to monitoring operational loss events, banks should specify and identify
appropriate indicators that provide early warning of an increased risk of future losses. Such
indicators (often referred to as key risk indicators or early warning indicators or operational
risk matrix) should be forward-looking and could reflect potential sources of operational risk
such as rapid growth, the introduction of new products, employee turnover, transaction
breaks, system failure, and so on. When thresholds are directly linked to these indicators, an
effective monitoring process can help identifying key material risks in a transparent manner
and enable the bank to act upon these risks appropriately. Regular reviews should be carried
out by internal audit, or other qualified parties, to analyze the control environment and test
the effectiveness of implemented controls, thereby ensuring business operations are
conducted in a controlled manner.

--- Page 49 ---
42

The results of monitoring activities should be included in regular management and board
reports as compliance reviews performed by the internal audit and risk management
functions.

4.10 Risk Reporting

Senior management should ensure that information is received by the appropriate people, on
a timely basis, in a form and format that will assist in the monitoring and control of the
business. The reporting process should include information such as:

a) The critical operational risks facing, or potentially facing, by the bank;
b) Risk events and issues together with intended remedial actions;
c) The effectiveness of actions taken;
d) Details of plans formulated to address risk issues;
e) Areas of stress where crystallization of operational risks is imminent; and
f) The status of steps taken to address operational risk.

The operational risk reports should contain internal financial, operational, and compliance
data, as well as external market information about events and conditions that are relevant to
decision making. Reports should be distributed to appropriate levels of management and to
areas of the bank on which concerns may have an impact. Reports should fully reflect any
identified problem areas and should motivate timely corrective action on outstanding issues.
To ensure the usefulness and reliability of these reports, management should regularly verify
the timeliness, accuracy, and relevance of reporting systems and internal controls in general.
Management may also use reports prepared by external sources (auditors, supervisors) to
assess the usefulness and reliability of internal reports.

Reports should be analyzed with a view to improving existing risk management performance
as well as developing new risk management policies, procedures and practices.

In general, the board should receive sufficient higher level information to enable them to
understand the bank’s overall operational risk profile and focus on the material and strategic
implications for the business.

4.11 Establishing Control Mechanism

Control activities are designed to address the operational risks that a bank has identified. For
all material operational risks that have been identified, the bank should decide whether to
use appropriate procedures to control and/or mitigate the risks, or bear the risks. For those
risks that cannot be controlled, the bank should decide whether to accept these risks, reduce
the level of business activity involved, or withdraw from this activity completely. To be
effective, control activities should be an integral part of the regular activities of a bank. A
framework of formal, written policies and procedures is necessary; it needs to be reinforced
through a strong control culture that promotes sound risk management practices.

--- Page 50 ---
43


4.12 Contingency Planning

Banks should have disaster recovery and business continuity plans to ensure its ability to
operate as a going concern and minimize losses in the event of severe business disruption.
The business disruption and contingency plans should take into account different types of
scenarios to which the bank may be vulnerable and should be commensurate with the size
and complexity of its operations. Management should identify critical business processes,
including those where there is dependence on external vendors or other third parties, for
which rapid resumption of service would be most essential. Plan should be tested
periodically to ensure that they are likely to be effective in case of need.

4.13 Internal Controls

Internal control systems should be established to ensure adequacy of the risk management
framework and compliance with a documented set of internal policies concerning the risk
management system. Principal elements of this could include, for example:


a) Top-level reviews of the bank's progress towards the stated objectives;
b) Checking for compliance with management controls;
c) Policies, processes and procedures concerning the review, treatment and resolution
of non-compliance issues; and
d) A system of documented approvals and authorizations to ensure accountability to the
appropriate level of management.

Although a framework of formal, written policies and procedures is critical, it needs to be
reinforced through a strong control culture that promotes sound risk management practices.
Board and senior management are responsible for establishing a strong internal control
culture in which control activities are an integral part of the regular activities of a bank.

Operational risk can be more pronounced where banks engage in new activities or develop
new products (particularly where these activities or products are not consistent with the
bank’s core business strategies), enter unfamiliar markets, and/or engage in businesses that
are geographically distant from the head office. It is, therefore, important for banks to ensure
that special attention is given to internal control activities including review of policies and
procedures to incorporate such conditions.

Banks should have in place adequate internal audit coverage to ensure that policies and
procedures have been implemented effectively. The board (either directly or indirectly
through its audit committee) should ensure that the scope and frequency of the audit
program is appropriate to the risk exposures. Audit should periodically validate that the
bank’s operational risk management framework is being implemented effectively across the
bank.

--- Page 51 ---
44

To the extent that the audit function is involved in oversight of the operational risk
management framework, the board should ensure that the independence of the audit
function is maintained. This independence may be compromised if the audit function is
directly involved in the operational risk management process. The audit function may
provide valuable input to those responsible for operational risk management, but should not
have direct operational risk management responsibilities.

An effective internal control system also requires existence of appropriate segregation of
duties and that personnel are not assigned responsibilities which may create a conflict of
interest. Assigning such conflicting duties to individuals, or a team, may enable them to
conceal losses, errors or inappropriate actions. Therefore, areas of potential conflict of
interest should be identified, minimized, and subjected to careful independent monitoring
and review.

In addition to segregation of duties, banks should ensure that other internal practices are in
place as appropriate to control operational risk.

--- Page 52 ---
45

Chapter 5
Capital Management


5.1 Capital Management and Its Relationship with Risk Management

Capital management in a bank usually refers to implementing measures aimed at
maintaining adequate capital, assessing internal capital adequacy of the bank and
calculating its capital adequacy ratio. It is gaining increasing importance around the world,
as reflected from taking several reform initiatives and changes in the prudential
requirements undertaken by banks in different countries in line with the reform measures
proposed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.

Risk management is increasingly becoming difficult to separate from capital management.
Most banking risks can be quantified as numerical indicators, and this quantification
naturally leads to the principle that increased capital can be held to cover unexpected losses
at a certain confidence level. The followings indicate the relationship between risk
management and capital requirement:

a) Capital management helps to ensure that the bank has sufficient capital to cover the
risks associated with its activities;
b) As part of the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP), management
identifies the risks that the bank is exposed to, and determines the means by which
they will be mitigated;
c) Capital is used to cover some of these risks, and the remainder of these risks is
mitigated by means of collateral or other credit enhancements, contingency planning,
additional reserves and valuation allowances, and other mechanisms.

The outcomes of capital management are:
i. A Capital Plan that meets the needs of the bank over a longer time horizon;
ii. An ICAAP that determines precise levels of required capital (the “solvency need”)
according to the measures of balance sheet capital and regulatory capital;
iii. A process to regularly compare available capital with current and projected solvency
needs, and address deficiencies in a timely manner.
5.2 Framework of Capital Management

Banks will devise and establish suitable capital management systems in order to calculate
the capital adequacy ratio and secure adequate capital to cover the risks they face, from the
standpoint of ensuring soundness and appropriateness of the their businesses. In this
regard, banks shall follow the latest guidelines on Risk Based Capital Adequacy and related
BB circulars/instructions to assess its capital adequacy.

--- Page 53 ---
46



Roles and responsibilities at various levels as well as the framework of capital management
are outlined as below:

5.2.1 Roles and Responsibilities of Board of Directors and Senior Management

The Board of Directors and Senior Management will take the following steps:

(1) Define the goals of capital management in an official policy statement. Such goals must
include the followings:
a) Regulatory compliance, such that capital levels always exceed BB’s requirements;
b) Capital levels that are aligned with the risks in the business and consistent with the
strategic plan; and
c) Appropriate capital level that maintains balance between maximizing shareholder
returns and protecting the interests of depositors and other creditors.

(2) Integrate capital management into the bank’s strategic plan taking into account the fact
that lack of the same could jeopardize the achievement of the bank's strategic
objectives. Annually, conduct a detailed strategic planning process over a three-year
time horizon, the outcomes of which are embodied in a Strategic Plan. The planning
process should include forecasting key economic variables which business lines may
use in allocating resources. New strategic initiatives to be undertaken over the
planning period and their financial impact are then determined;

(3) These planning processes are used then to review capital ratios, targets, and levels of
different classes of capital against the bank’s risk profile and risk appetite. The board
must be satisfied that capital levels under specific stressed economic scenarios are
sufficient to remain above both BB and the bank’s internal requirements;

(4) Review the policies and specific measures for developing and establishing an adequate
capital management system with a full grasping of the assessment, monitoring and
control techniques of internal capital adequacy as well as the significance of capital
management;

(5) Disseminate the capital management policies throughout the bank. The policies should
be inclusive of the following matters:

a) The roles and responsibilities of the Board of Directors, executive risk management
committee and Basel Implementation Unit (BIU) of the bank with regard to capital
management;
b) Basic policies for maintaining sufficient capital and on the capital allocation process;
c) Policy on the risk limits in relation to the capital;
d) The definition of capital and risk as used in the Internal Capital Adequacy
Assessment Process (ICAAP);

--- Page 54 ---
47

e) Calculation of the capital adequacy ratio in line with capital adequacy guidelines
issued by Bangladesh Bank; and
f) Methods of internal capital adequacy assessment in conducting capital allocation
process, and the basis for the calculation of capital to be allocated to risks.

(6) Analyze present as well as future capital needs of the bank and adopt suitable capital-
raising methods, satisfying the prudential and regulatory requirements of BB;

(7) Ensure consistency of the capital management system with the bank’s risk profile and
the competing business environment;

(8) Set an appropriate level of capital target for the short-term, medium-term and long-
term and develop a Capital Plan to achieve the target. The Capital Plan must identify
the capital issuance requirements and options around capital products, such as the
issuance of common equity, timing and markets to execute the Capital Plan under
different market and economic conditions. The following factors should be taken into
account in setting the capital targets:

a) BB's regulatory capital requirements;
b) Coverage of unexpected losses up to a certain probability of occurrence (economic
capital);
c) Expected asset growth and profitability;
d) Dividend policy;
e) Stress test scenarios;
f) The basis for the calculation of capital to be allocated to risk;
g) Capital management rules exhaustively covering the arrangements necessary for
the ICAAP and the calculation of the capital adequacy ratio and the arrangements
befitting the scale and nature of the bank business and its risk profile;

h) Consistency of the definition of capital used in the ICAAP and the bank's corporate
management policy and plans, its strategic objectives, etc.;

i) The basis for determining the definition of capital as used in the ICAAP in
reference to capital as defined under regulations concerning capital adequacy
ratios-Tier 1, Tier 2 capital, and eligible capital; (To update the literature in terms
of Basel III)

j) Keeping the BIU, with close relationship with RMD, in charge of the ICAAP and the
calculation of the capital adequacy ratio independent from other offices/divisions
and secure a check-and-balance system;

--- Page 55 ---
48

Chapter 6

Risk Management Reporting


6.1 Risk Management Reporting

After proper analysis, risks are to be prioritized and reported to competent authorities (both
internal and external) by RMD on regular basis.
Banks shall prepare Monthly Risk Management Report (MRMR) and Comprehensive Risk
Management Report (CRMR) according to the formats provided by BB as a minimum
requirement. They can also include additional information related to the concerned risk
areas depending on the nature, complexity and size of business. Banks shall arrange monthly
meeting of ERMC to discuss the risk issues based on the findings of the risk reports prepared
by the RMD and shall submit the CRMR and MRMR along with the minutes of ERMC meeting
to DOS of BB within stipulated time. Discussions & decisions of ERMC must be reflected in
the meeting minutes. Banks shall also submit the board approved Risk Appetite Statement (RAS)
on yearly basis and BRMC meeting minutes on regular basis. Besides they shall submit a soft
copy of Stress Test report to DOS of BB on half yearly basis along with risk reports. The risk
reports and forwarding letter are to be signed by the CRO.

In addition to the above reporting requirements, all banks must submit review report (board
resolution copy) of Risk Management Policies and effectiveness of risk management
functions with the approval of the board of directors to DOS of BB on yearly basis.


6.2 Penalty for Non-Compliance

If a bank’s employee willfully/knowingly furnishes false information in reporting to BB, such
an offence is punishable under section 109(2) of the Bank Company Ain 1991. BB may
impose penalty as per section 109(7) of the said Ain if a bank fails to submit the above
mentioned reports within stipulated time without any acceptable/satisfactory reason.

--- Page 56 ---
49

Glossary

Risks are the potential that an uncertainties, event, action or inaction will adversely impact the
ability of an entity to achieve its organizational objectives. In this definition, uncertainties include
events which may or may not happen as well as uncertainties caused by ambiguity or a lack of
information.

Risk management framework is a set of components that provide the foundations and
organizational arrangements for designing, implementing, monitoring, reviewing and continually
improving risk management throughout the organization. The notion of a risk management
framework is essentially equivalent to the concept of Enterprise Risk Management (ERM).

Risk culture is about understanding risks the financial institution faces and how they are managed. A
sound and consistent risk culture throughout a financial institution is a key element of effective risk
management. Risk culture and its impact on effective risk management must be a major concern for
the board and senior management.

Risk appetite is the amount and type of risk an organization is prepared to pursue or take, in order
to attain the objectives of the organization and those of its shareholders and stakeholders.

Risk capacity is the amount and type of risk an organization is able to support in pursuit of its
business objectives.

Risk tolerance(s) is/are quantified risk criteria or measures of risk exposure that serve to clarify and
communicate risk appetite. Risk tolerances are used in risk evaluation in order to determine the
treatment needed for acceptable risk.

Risk target is the optimal level of risk that an organization wants to take in pursuit of a specific
business goal.

Risk limit is a measure of risk, either expressed in terms of (gross) exposure or possible loss or in
another metric that tends to correlate with exposure or possible loss. Being a limit, this measure of
risk is articulated as an indication of risk tolerance with the intention to constrain risky activities or
positions within an entity to an acceptable level.

Risk exposure designates a gross measure of risk, before taking account of risk mitigation and
before applying any particular knowledge about the probability of loss events that would activate the
exposure.

Risk severity is determined by the size of the possible loss or the gravity of the impact, in the event
that a certain risk should materialize. It does not imply any particular knowledge about how likely or
frequent such an event might be.

Risk profile is the amount or type of risk a financial institution is exposed to. Forward Risk Profile is
a forward looking view of how the risk profile may change both under expected and stressed
economics conditions.

Risk governance refers to the structure, rules, processes, and mechanisms by which decisions about
risks are taken and implemented. Risk governance covers the questions about what risk management
responsibilities lie at what levels and the ways the board influences risk-related decisions; and the
role, structure, and staffing of risk organization.

Bibliography

1. Corporate governance principle for banks, BCBS, July,2015.
2. https://www.ausport.gov.au/__data/assets/word_doc/0005/454928/Risk_Management_process.doc