--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular Letter No. 07 Date: April 11, 2021

Head offices/principal offices of all
Authorized Dealers in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Payment of royalty, fees for technical knowledge or technical assistance
and franchise fees to foreign persons or institutes

Please refer to paragraph 25, chapter 10 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions-
2018 (GFET), Vol-1 and its subsequent circulars regarding the requirement of approval under
Section 18 of Bangladesh Investment Development Authority (BIDA) Act, 2016 to make payments
of royalty, fees for technical knowledge or technical assistance and franchise fees to foreign
persons or institutes in accordance with the prescribed manner as defined by BIDA. Paragraph 26
ibid outlines operational formalities to be followed by Authorized Dealers (ADs) before execution
of remittances approved by BIDA.

02. BIDA has issued Circular No. 03.08.2680.224.165.1479.2017/59 of March 03, 2021 (copy
attached) regarding the guidelines for outward remittances on account of royalty, technical
knowledge/technical know-how fee(s), technical assistance fee(s) and franchise fee(s). Schedule 1
appended with the guidelines contains permissible amount of fee(s) to be remitted without BIDA’s
approval. In accommodating the requests for specified remittance under general authorization, ADs
shall observe the instructions of the guidelines. In case of advance payment permitted in
accordance with guidelines of BIDA, ADs shall observe regulatory instructions contained in
GFET-2018 and its subsequent circulars in this regard.
03. Transactions under the authorization shall be executed by one AD bank branch nominated
by remitters. For any intended change in this respect, the relevant files shall be transferred direct to
the concerned new AD branch on written request by remitters. ADs shall, before effecting the
transactions, have been ensured of deductions and payments of source taxes, VAT and other levies
applicable against the remittances. As usual, ADs shall comply with Section 3(4) of FER Act,
1947, including observance of due diligence with regards to KYC and AML/CFT standards,
reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank under Foreign Exchange regulations, preserve customer-wise
documents and so on.

04. In accordance with the issuance of the above guidelines by BIDA, paragraph 25, chapter
10 of GFET shall stand modified with the above instructions. However, paragraph 26 ibid needs to
be followed in case of remittance requests under specific approval from BIDA.

Please bring the contents of this circular letter to the notice of all concerned constituents.




Enclosure: As stated

Yours faithfully,


(Md. Shahidul Islam )
General Manager (Current Charge)

Phone: 9530123

--- Page 2 ---
†iwR÷vW© bs wW G-1


evsjv‡`k

†M‡RU
AwZwi³ msL¨v
KZ…©cÿ KZ…©K cÖKvwkZ
kwbevi, gvP© 20, 2021
Bangladesh Investment Development Authority
Prime Minister’s Office
Circular
Date : 03 March, 2021
Subject : Guidelines for Outward Remittance Repatriation for Payment of
Royalty, Technical Knowledge/Technical Know-how Fee(s),
Technical Assistance Fee(s), and Franchise Fee(s)-2020.
No. 03.08.2680.224.165.1479.2017/59This Guidelines is issued in
pursuance of Section 18 of the ‘Bangladesh Investment Development Authority
Act 2016’; ‘Foreign Exchange Regulation Act 1947’ amended in 2015; and
related instructions described in the ‘Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions 2018’ (read with subsequent amendments) of Bangladesh Bank
along with Foreign Exchange (FE) Circular No. 42 Dated November 29, 2017 of
Bangladesh Bank in order to serve the purpose of clarifying processes and
procedures for outward remittance repatriation for payment of royalty, technical
knowledge/technical know-how fee(s), technical assistance fee(s), and franchise
fee(s) by private industrial enterprises registered in Bangladesh (with ‘Registrar
of Joint Stock Companies and Firms’ as well as with BIDA) and as defined in
Section 15(3) of the Bangladesh investment Development Authority Act 2016.
( 6901 )
g~j¨ t UvKv 16.00
ÒRvwZi wcZv e½eÜz †kL gywReyi ingv‡bi
Rb¥kZevwl©Kx D`&hvcb mdj †nvKÓ

--- Page 3 ---
6902
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021

The industrial enterprises, so described, shall follow the processes and
procedures described in this Guidelines for payment of royalty, fee(s) for
technical knowledge/technical know-how or technical assistance, and franchise
fee(s) to foreign collaborator/organization/company in accordance with the
definitions and manners as follows.
1.0 Definitions
Authorized Dealer (AD) Bank

An Authorized Dealer bank is the branch(es) of scheduled bank in
Bangladesh that has received authorization from the Bangladesh Bank to act
as a dealer involved in trading of foreign currencies for specified purposes.
Advance Fee(s)

Advance Fee(s), for this Guidelines, may mean the amount of money paid
in advance (in part or in full against the appropriate invoices) against the
agreed services expected to be delivered in the manner of technical
assistance, technical knowledge/know-how, royalty and/or franchisee fee(s)
in favor of a collaborator company outside Bangladesh during the
implementation stage of a business where commercial operation has not
started yet or no capital machinery have so far been imported.
Affidavit (for adjustment of Advance Payment)

An Affidavit, in connection with this Guidelines, will be a statement of
facts and promise made by an applicant company under oath (certified by a
notary public), meaning to make a formal promise to be used in a court or
by another official institution (such as a bank) that confirms that the
approval of advance outward remittance payment is received from BIDA
for the purpose of the concerned business setup processes only and the
amount remitted as advance fee(s) will be brought back from the concerned
foreign collaborator or will be deposited with foreign currency equivalent
BDT in their bank account from where the fund was initially parked by the
applicant company and within the time decided by BIDA in case the facts
stated appears to be false and/or the business does not start its commercial
operation as committed.
Arm’s Length Transaction

The arm’s length transaction, also known as the Arm’s Length Principle
(ALP) indicates a transaction between two completely independent and
willing parties in which both parties are acting in their own self-interest.
Such transaction is based exclusively on fair market value.

--- Page 4 ---
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021
6903


Bank Guarantee

A bank guarantee is a promissory note from a bank or other lending
institution confirming that if a particular company being a party to
agreement defaults on a commitment, the bank will make good of that
commitment. In this case a letter of credit might not be accepted as a bank
guarantee.
Beneficiary Organization

A legally competent party and company registered outside Bangladesh who
has signed an agreement with a company registered in Bangladesh for the
purpose of providing to the later various services of technical nature in
exchange of agreed amount of fee(s), or providing permission to allow their
brand names to be used by the later in exchange of a once-only franchisee
fee(s) and/or a royalty fee(s) for approved period, wherever if applicable.
BIDA

BIDA means the Bangladesh Investment Development Authority formed by
the Bangladesh Investment Development Authority Act 2016.
Brand name

Brand name is a name given by the producer company and/or the maker to a
product or range of products, especially a trademark for the purpose of
uniquely identifying the product in the market. The name shall be
recognized by the appropriate law of the country.
C&F Value

Cost and Freight (C&F) is a term of sale/trade signifying that the price
invoiced or quoted by a seller for a shipment does not include insurance
charges, but includes all expenses up to a consented port of destination.
Collaborator

Same as Beneficiary Organization.
Contract

For the purpose of this Guidelines, contract will mean a negotiated and
legally enforceable (in a court of law) understanding and/or agreement
between two or more legally competent parties (e.g., between a company
registered in Bangladesh and a company registered outside of Bangladesh

--- Page 5 ---
6904
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021

in this case) for the payment of various fee(s) (in accordance with the
section 18 of BIDA Act 2016 and associated orders) to be remitted by the
company registered in Bangladesh in favor of the later. The agreement must
be signed and vetted properly by the legal representatives of the parties of
the agreement in due place, initialed in every page of the agreement by the
signatories, and observing due requirements of the law of the country. Any
page of the agreement without the signature of both the parties may not be
considered as a legal part of the agreement. The agreement must include,
but not limited to, (i) the purpose of payment of fee(s), (ii) the scopes and
justification of the fees for the benefit of the recipient organization, (iii)
conditions of the fee(s) becoming payable, (iv) amount and/or calculation
basis of the fee(s), (v) payment schedule of the fee(s), (vi) the validity
period of the agreement as well as (vii) the activities to be undertaken with
delivery schedule and acknowledgement procedure of the agreed services.
Copyright

Copyright is a legal term used to describe the rights that creators have over
their literary and artistic works that provides exclusive publication,
distribution, and usage rights for the creators. Works covered by copyright
range from books, music, paintings, sculpture, and films, to computer
programs, databases, advertisements, maps, and technical drawings.
Design

Means only the features of shape, configuration, pattern or ornament
applied to any article by any value creation process or means, whether
manual, mechanical or chemical, separate or combined, which in the
finished article appeal to and are judged solely by the eye; but does not
include any mode or principle of construction or anything which is in
substance a mere mechanical device, and does not include any trade mark
as defined in section 478, or property mark as defined in section 479 of the
Penal Code.
Contractor

A person of firm that undertakes a contract to provide materials or labor or
to perform a service or do a job which may include Engineering,
Procurement, and Construction (EPC) or any other activities of similar
nature, The activities may also include design, procurement, construction,
to commissioning and handover of the project to the End-User or Owner or
any other party pertinent.

--- Page 6 ---
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021
6905


Fee(s)

Fee(s), for the purpose of this Guidelines, will mean the technical assistance
fee(s), technical knowledge/technical knowhow fee(s), franchisee fee(s),
royalty fee(s), and outlet opening fee(s), and to be paid/remitted by the
applicant company to the collaborator company outside Bangladesh.
Foreign Principal

Same as Beneficiary Organization or Collaborator.
Franchise

A franchise is a type of license that a party (franchisee) acquires to allow
them to have access to a business’s (franchisor) proprietary knowledge,
processes, anything intangible asset in nature, and trademarks in order to
allow the party to sell a product or provide a service under the business’s
name.
Franchisee

An individual or company that holds a franchise for the sale of goods or the
operation of a service from the franchiser.
Franchiser

A company that provides franchise rights to those who want to own a
franchise.
Franchise Fee(s)

Franchise fee(s) is any fee(s) or charge that a franchisee or sub-franchisor is
required to pay or agrees to pay for the right to enter into a business or to
continue a business under a franchising agreement. It is an initial fee(s)
required to pay by a party (franchisee) to a business’s (the franchiser) for
having access to it’s his brand name/proprietary knowledge, processes and
trademarks or anything intangible asset in nature in order to sell a product
or provide a service under that business’s name.
Guidelines

Guidelines means the “Guidelines for Outward Remittance Repatriation for
Payment of Royalty, Technical knowledge/Technical know-how Fee(s),
Technical Assistance Fee(s), and Franchise Fee(s), 2020” as approved and
circulated by BIDA.

--- Page 7 ---
6906
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021

Industrial Enterprise
Any private industrial enterprise in Bangladesh as registered by BIDA and
defined in Section 15(3) of the Bangladesh Investment Development
Authority Act, 2016.
Intellectual Property
Intellectual Property (IP) refers to creations of the mind, such as inventions;
literary and artistic works, designs, symbols, names and images used in
commerce. It might include, but not limited to, copyright, patents,
trademarks, industrial designs, geographical indications, and trade secrets
which should have economic value.
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Fee(s)
The O&M Fee(s) is a type of payment paid to a collaborator for the
operation and maintenance (O&M) services, which is technical in nature
and associated with operating and maintaining of a particular process of the
industrial endeavor.
Outlet Opening Fee(s)

Fee(s) charged by a franchisor to open a distinguishable unit branch/outlet
of the franchise by the franchisee.
Outward Remittance
Outward remittance means a remittance by a remitting bank, entrusted by
the remitter being an enterprise, remit foreign currency funds to a
nominated bank selected by the collaborator in performing any assigned
activities to beneficiaries of the certain instrument and instruct them to pay
the certain amount to the nominated payee.
aa. Parent Company
A parent company is a company that owns enough voting stock in another
firm to control management and operation by influencing or electing its
board of directors. Companies that operate under this management are
deemed subsidiaries or associates of the parent company.
bb. Patent
A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention, which is a product or
a process that provides, a new way of doing something, or offeres a new
technical solution to a problem. The technical information about the
invention must be disclosed to the public in a patent application and must be
registered with the related agency of the country concerned.

--- Page 8 ---
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021
6907


cc. Private Firms

Private firm means any industrial enterprises as defined in Section 15(3) of
the Bangladesh Investment Development Authority Act, 2016.
dd. Professional Valuation Agency
A person or company, who provides valuations of the property and serivce
(Including franchisee and related fee(s)) to support taxation and other
purposes.
ee. Royalty fee(s)
Royalty is a fee(s) paid by a local industrial company to the foreign
collaborator in consideration of license to use the foreign manufacturers’
patent/brand name/franchise for marketing and or producing the product(s).
Royalties are payments of various types to owners of property for use of
that property which usually deals with payments for the right to use
intellectual property, like copyrights, patents, and trademarks the fee(s)
payable to the royalty will comply with the related provisions of the Patents
and Designs Act, 1911 and Trade Mark Act, 2009 of Bangladesh.
ff.
Sales Revenue
Sales revenue is the income received by a company from its sales of goods
or the provision of services.
gg. Technical Assistance

A specific non-generic assistance which requires definite skill to complete a
defined task contracted to the industries and/or companies by local or
international specialists. It can take the form of sharing information and
expertise, instruction, skill training, transmission of working knowledge,
facilitating for creating specific task and consulting services. Technical
assistance fee(s) may include fee(s) for Engineering, Procurement and
Construction (EPC), Operation and Maintenance (O&M) fee(s) and any
fee(s) associated in the nature of technical assistance for requiring project
for which the payment of these fee(s) are necessary to successfull
completion of these projects.
hh. Technical knowlege/Technical know-how

A service rendered by a foreign collaborator/parent/group to a business
entity duly registered with BIDA in consideration of specialized services
including engineering and technical service, assistance on manufacturing

--- Page 9 ---
6908
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021

process, testing and quality control, assistance or any other technical
support required for running the projects by way of makig available
patented processes and/or know-how and right to avail of the technical/
confidential, non-public, proprietary and an exclusive information resulting
from continuous technical research and development etc. the technical
knowledge/technical knowhow will not be aplicabe for purchase/ hiring of
technical assistance.
ii.
Third Party Assessment
Third-party assessments, for the purpose of this Guidelines, are independent
evaluations performed by a specialist firm, chartered accounting firm or
agency on the amout of franchisee fee(s) settled between the franchise and
the franchisor in connection to operating a franchise business in
Bangladesh.
jj.
Third Party Assessor
A specialist firm, chartered accounting firm or agency that carries out the
third party assessment.
kk. Trade Mark
“Trademark” means the trade mark defined in the Section 2(8) of the Trade
Mark Act, 2009 of Bangladesh, which is as under :
‘(a) in relation to Chapter X of Trade Mark Act 2009, other than section 77-
(i) a registered trademark or a mark used in relation to goods for the
purpose of indicating a connection in the course of trade between the
goods and the person having the right as proprietor to use the mark;
(ii) a mark used in relation to a service so that it may be indicated that
the person has the right as proprietor to use the mark in the course of
trade;
(b) in relation to the other provisions of this Act, a mark used or proposed
to be used in relation to any service or goods indicating a connection in the
course of trade between the goods and the person having the right, either as
proprietor or as registered user, to use the mark;
(c) certification trademark

--- Page 10 ---
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021
6909


ll.
Transfer Pricing
Transfer pricing is the setting of the price for goods and services sold
between controlled (or related) legal entities within an enterprise. Transfer
pricing is a pricing mechanism among willing partners in an arm’s lengths
transaction which is defined as per the applicable section of CHAPTER
XIA of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1984 of Bangladesh as well as globally
accepted best practices. Transfer pricing involves the assignment of costs to
transactions for goods and services betwen related parties. For example, if a
subsidiary company sells goods to a parent company, the cost of those
goods paid by the parent to the subsidiary is the transfer price.
2.0 Types of Permissible Fee(s)
Permission will be given to any private industrial enterprise as registered by
BIDA and defined in Section 15(3) of the Bangladesh Investment Development
Authority Act, 2016 for outward remittance on account of payment of royalty,
technical knowledge/technical know-how fee(s), technical assistance fee(s), and
franchisee fee(s), as mentioned in this Guidelines. The permission will also be
granted for outward remittance for paying fee(s) in the nature of operation and
maintenance (O&M) services, payable to foreign Engineering. Procurement and
Construction (EPC) firms or contractors or companies associated with any public
or private project implemented in Bangladesh.
3.0 General Conditions
The permission for outward remittance repatriation will be allowed under the
following conditions:
Private industrial enterprises as registered by BIDA and defined in
Section 15(3) of the Bangladesh Investment Development Authority
Act, 2016 will be considered for such permission.
All proposals for outward remittance will be considered based on the
value addition of the transaction. Transaction of no or minimum value
addition, transaction made without following arm’s length principle
and/or transaction of rudimentary nature will be discouraged.
Fee(s) will be allowed to remit by the local companies to their foreign
collaborator usually on a yearly basis. This condition of remittance
may be relaxed in case of a genuine contractual obligation for any
transaction.

--- Page 11 ---
6910
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021

4.0 Procedures of Remitting Fee(s)
4.1 Payment of royalty, tecnical knowledge/technical knowhow, technical
assistance and franchise Fee(s)
4.1.1 As a general principle, an industrial enterprise (registered with BIDA) will
be allowed to remit permissible amount of fee(s) as specified in Schedule 1) for
the purpose of paying royalty, technical knowledge/technical know-how,
technical assistance and franchise to the foreign collaborators directly through
Authorized Dealer (AD) Banks in Bangladesh without prior approval from BIDA
while complying with the provisions (scope of services, payment amount,
payment schedule and other applicable conditionalities) as stated in the
concerned contract between the parties which has been pre-endorsed by BIDA
beforehand, subject to the following conditions:
This provision will be applicable only for post-service cases and
against a service completion certificate from the beneficiaries.
(b) The industrial enterprise(s) have to apply to BIDA in prescribed
format for endorsing the contracts immediately after signing and
before any remittance takes plase.
Designated official of BIDA, after ensuring approval from appropriate
authorities, will endorse the contract with his/her signature and seal in
each and every page(s) of the contract. The endorsement letter such
issued shall clearly state the titles/names, respective limits,
timeframes, conditionality and schedules of payments of fees. BIDA
may require the applicant to revise the contract to comply with the
provisions of this Guidelines before the endorsement is provided.
(d) One contract will require endorsement from BIDA only for once and
can afterwards be used for multiple remittance transactions as long as
these remains within the purview/limit of the endorsed payment
schedule of the endorsed contract However, re-endrosedments(s) of
the contracts will be requried if any change/update/improvement of
the contract takes place later.
During repatriation of the remittance(s), the concerned industrial
enterprise will ensure that the purpose of the remittances complies
with the provisions (scope of services, payment amount, payment
schedule and other applicable conditionality) of the contract/
agreement endorsed by BIDA.

--- Page 12 ---
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021
6911


BIDA will suggest an application format and a list of required
documentation to be complied with by the industrial enterprises as
well as to be followed/checked by the AD Banks in processing the
remittance repatriation applications. Copy of the contract endorsed
by BIDA should be considered as a mandatory document when an
application for remittance is made by the industrial enterprise(s) to
the AD Banks.
(g) AD Banks will further ensure that the provisions of the relevant
guidelines of BIDA and the Bank is fully complied with.
(h) After the remittance repatriation is completed, AD Banks will
forward all relevant documents to BIDA for information and post
facto verification. BIDA may carry out post facto verification of all
or some of the transactions so happened and may take appropriate
pecuniary measures against the concerned industrial enterprise if
any deviation and discrepancies are found. BIDA will keep the
Bangladesh Bank informed about any such incident(s), if so
happen.
Concerned AD Banks will appropriately follow all the relevant
banking and reporting rules and regulations while carrying out the
remittance repatriation as are described in this Guidelines.
Banglsdesh Bank will have the authority take appropriate actions
against any such banks if any deviation and discrepancies of
existing rules and regulations are observed.
4.1.2 In cases the amount of remeittance for the purpose of paying royalty,
technical knowledge/ technical know-how, technical assistance and franchise to
the foreign collaborators exceeds the limit mentioned in Sehedule 1, prior
approval from BIDA will be reqired before remitting the same through the AD
Banks.
4.2 Payment of Fee(s) in Advance
Advance payment of remittances will be allowed, only with prior approval
from BIDA on each and every case of repatriation, on following
conditions:
Technical knowledge/technical knowhow or technical assistance
fee(s) up to US$ 10,000 per agreement will be allowed to remit
once a year. This advance payment must be adjusted with the
accumulated C&F value of import of machineries or with the sales
revenue of the company after going into operation.

--- Page 13 ---
6912
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021

(ii) Advance payment beyond the limit stated in para 4.2 (i) will be
allowed only on the terms and conditions mentioned in the contract
(verified/endorsed by BIDA) signed between the local company
and the foreign company.
(iii) Any kind of advance payment as stipulated in this Guidelines must
be adjusted with the 6% of the C&F value of all imported
machineries or with the 6% of the revenue/sales within two (02)
years of starting commercial operation. BIDA may consider any
request to extend the duration of adjustment in cases of
unforeseeable situation.
(iv) Applications for allowing advance payment as stipulated in this
Guidelines must be accompanied with bank guarantee, affidavit or
any other appropriate guarantee.
4.3 Payment of Fee(s) to Contractor(s) in a Project
Contractor(s) form foreign countries and operating in Bangladesh
with any public or private project will be allowed to remit fee(s),
only with prior approval from BIDA on each and every case of
repatriation, The payment of such fee(s) may be allowed on
quarterly, semi-annually and annual basis as stipulated in the
agreement.
(b) If any local company made an agreement with an international
service provider for delivering any service produced locally or
imported from overseas, the local company can apply for
permission to remit fee(s) earned from that service. BIDA will
examine issues related to such transaction while granting any
permission for such outword remittance.
5.0 Fee(s) beyond permissible amounts
Proposal for outword remittance exceeding 6% (for the cases of royalty/
technical knowledge/technical know-how/technical assistance) will need
prior approval from BIDA, even if the concerned contract/agreement
contains endorsement from BIDA. BIDA may consider such proposals that
generate significant continuing impact on the economy and have substantial
linkage/value creation, generate significant number
of
employment,
transfer advanced technology, enhance skill of local force, and/or diversify
agricultural, manufacturing and service sector of the country.

--- Page 14 ---
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021
6913


6.0 Transfer Pricing Issues
If the proposed remittance is being paid/remitted to a sister concern or parent or
subsidiary of the applicant company, a third-party assessment should be
submitted explaning whether the Arm’s Length principal has been followed in
the said transaction in accordance with the rules stipulated in the Income Tax
Ordinance 1984 (and as ammended).
7.0 Matters to be dealt by Bangladesh Bank
Bangladesh Bank may look into the issues of remittances that are beyond the
scope of BIDA and of this Guidelines. Bangladesh Bank may issue operational
instructions time to time to the Authorized Dealer Banks with regards to
remittances of foreign exchanges in the mentioned areas based on requests by
BIDA.
8.0 Application Procedure
Both manual and Online Applications for contract/agreement endorsements and
remittance repatriation (as applicable according to the provisions of Paragraph
4.0) will be accepted in BIDA. Applications can be made together with relevant
documents according to prescribed aplication format. Online applications
can be submitted through BIDA website at www.bida.gov.bd or www.
bidaquickserv.org.
BIDA, wherever applicable, will examine necessary documents related with the
projects, all types of contractual documents, financial agreements, as well as
other essential/associated documents as deemed necessary to assess the proposed
transaction. Applications will be considered based on the merits of the proposals
such as : technology transfer, linkage/value creation, employment generation,
local skill enhancement, diversification of new manufacturing and service
sectors.
9.0 Authenticity of the Submitted Information
The applicant must have to submit an undrtaking to BIDA mentioning that all
records, documents, information and statements submitted and/or furnished are
authentic and true. BIDA reserves all rights to take appropriate legal action and
impose pecuniary penalty if any false or fabricated document and information
have been submitted or furnished. BIDA also reserves the right to take legal
action and/or file criminal case(s) against the applicant if it is found or detected
in future that false information and/or false or fabricated document(s) were given
or submitted with any proposal for remittance.

--- Page 15 ---
6914
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021

10.0 Amendments of the Guidelines
BIDA will have the authority to amend and replace any part and/or the whole of
the Guidelines as and when required.
11.0 Repealing of all previous Guidelines
All previous guidelines, circulars, orders, rules and/or acts issued by erstwhile
Board of Investment and/or BIDA on issues related to outward remittances are
repealed henceforth. Nevertheless, decisions made on repealed guidelines,
circulars, orders, rules and/or acts will be deemed to be valid under this
Guidelines, while only the pending decisions will be finalized based on previous
guidelines, circulars, orders, rules and/or acts.

MOHSINA YASMIN

Executive Member 3

(Additional Secretary).

--- Page 16 ---
evsjv‡`k †M‡RU, AwZwi³, gvP© 20, 2021
6915


Schedule 1
Permissible amount of fee(s) to be remitted without BIDA’s approval
(pursuant to the provisions of Paragraph 4.1)
1.0 Royalty, technical knowledge/technical know-how, technical assistance
fee(s)
For projects under implementation, not exceeding 6% of the total
accumulated C&F value of imported machineries of the concurrent
year(s) before going into commercial operation;
(b) For projects under commercial operation, not exceeding 6% of the
previous years’ sales (excluding Value Added Tax) as declared in the
income tax returns.
2.0 Franchise fee(s)

Fee(s) more than US$ 0.1 million USD will be allowed to be remitted in
installments. The 50% of the approved claim will be allowed to remit in the
1st year, 30% in the 2nd year, and the rest of the 20% in the 3rd year.
3.0 Advance fee(s)

All advance payments, if allowed before generating revenue must be
adjusted within one year of going into commercial operation by the entity.
4.0 Fee(s) payable to Contractor(s) in a project

In case of recurring payments required by any obligatory agreement,
maximum 6% of sales revenue (excluding Value Added Tax) as declared in
the previous year’s income tax return or VAT return (VAT retruns will be
considered only for the first year in case of new project) may be allowed.
The payment of such fee(s) may be allowed on quarterly, semi-annually and
annual basis as stipulated in the agreement.
†gvnv¤§` BmgvBj †nv‡mb (DcmwPe), DccwiPvjK, evsjv‡`k miKvix gy`ªYvjq, †ZRMuvI, XvKv KZ©„K gyw`ªZ|
gvKmy`v †eMg wmÏxKv, DccwiPvjK (DcmwPe), evsjv‡`k dig I cÖKvkbv Awdm, †ZRMuvI,
XvKv KZ©„K cÖKvwkZ| web site: www. bgpress. gov. bd