--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 22 Date: June 21, 2021

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Indicative cost for access to short term permissible trade finance in foreign exchange
Please refer to paragraph 25, chapter 8 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions, 2018 (GFET), Vol-1 and its subsequent circulars in terms of which usance export
bills can be discounted at all-in-cost of 6-month LIBOR + 3.50 percent per annum. Such
instruction with respect to interest is applicable for payment guarantee and early payment against
export under open account in accordance with FE Circular No. 25 of June 30, 2020.
02. To bring flexibility in a wider scope for short term export financing in foreign
currency at post shipment stages, it has been decided that:
(a) Besides LIBOR, alternative reference/benchmark rate in the currency of financing,
declared by competent bodies, may be applied with prescribed mark up of 3.50 percent
per annum for discounting/early payment of export bills;
(b) The tenure like 1-month, 3-month and so on will be flexible, depending on the credit
period for financing;
(c) In absence of tenure-linked rate, the relative rate applied as reference/benchmark rate
for financing usance/credit export bills in the form of discounting/early payment
including payment guarantee may be compounded in advance to calculate effective
interest for the specified tenure.
03. In case of Islamic Shariah-based financing, globally recognized reference/benchmark
rate should be applied instead of traditional one, with the prescribed mark up.
04. The above decisions shall, other than 2(c) above, equally be applicable for
permissible usance import under supplier’s/buyer’s credit. Instead of 2(c), where forward
looking reference/benchmark rate with tenure-link is absent, the relative rate applied as
reference/benchmark rate for import finance may be compounded in arrears to calculate effective
interest for the tenure of credit.
05. In case of risk free reference/benchmark rate to be applied for financing, adjustment
for risk premium not exceeding 2.50 percent per annum on markup of 3.50 percent may be added
with reference/benchmark rate compounded in advance or in arrear as necessary, for the relative
tenure.
06. Respective reference/benchmark rate may, in case of necessity for phasing out of
LIBOR, be applied during the credit period as per mutual understanding with the concerned
lenders. In addition, ADs shall refrain from arranging LIBOR-tag financing as and when global
discourse is published with regards to deadline for its usability.
Please bring the contents of this circular on indicative cost for trade finance, adjustable
by Bangladesh Bank based on market conditions, to the notice of your concerned constituents.

Yours faithfully,

(Md. Shahidul Islam)
General Manager (Current Charge)
Phone: 9530123