--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd


FE Circular No. 17





Date: May 02, 2021

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Remittance facilities to e-commerce traders

Please refer to paragraph 39, chapter 10 & paragraph 11, chapter 19 of the Guidelines for
Foreign Exchange Transactions-2018, Vol-1 (GFET) and its subsequent circulars regarding annual
remittance facilities to BASIS member firms for meeting bonafide current payments, including
transactions by international cards. The transactions are subject to compliance with applicable
instructions, including recommendation of BASIS.

02. To facilitate e-commerce trade in the country, it has been decided that Authorized Dealers
(ADs) may allow annual remittance facilities of USD 10,000 or its equivalent to a member firm of e-
Commerce Association of Bangladesh (e-CAB) for meeting bonafide current expenses abroad through
traditional banking channel or card channel. In this case, ADs may issue refillable international
credit/pre-paid card with USD 2,000 to the nominated official of the remitter within the limit.
Aggregate refills in cards and remittances by banking channel shall not exceed total limit of USD
10,000 in a calendar year.

03. Outward remittances on account of royalty, technical knowledge/technical know-how fee,
technical assistance fee and franchise fee shall be guided by the guidelines of BIDA circulated vide FE
Circular Letter No. 07 of April 11, 2021; and authorization as noted at 2 above will not be applicable
for these purposes.

04. Transactions under the authorization at 2 above shall be executed by a single AD bank
branch nominated by remitters. For any intended change of AD branch, the relevant files shall be
transferred direct to the concerned new AD branch on written request by eligible firms.

05. As usual, ADs shall comply with relevant instructions of GFET including deduction and
payments of applicable taxes at sources, VAT and other levies, recommendation from e-CAB,
reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank and so on.

Please bring the above instructions, effective immediately, to the notice of your concerned
clientele.

Yours faithfully,

(Md. Shahidul Islam)
General Manager (Current Charge)
Phone: 9530123