--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 32

Date: October 03, 2021

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,
Direct dispatch of export documents by exporters

Please refer to paragraph 10(iii), chapter 8 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions-2018 (GFET), Vol-1 in terms of which Authorized Dealers (ADs) are required to pass
all shipping documents covering exports from Bangladesh as per declaration on EXP Form within 14
days from the date of shipment.

02. To accommodate customary practice in export trade, it has been decided that ADs may
allow exporters to dispatch export documents (excluding original transport document of title to cargo)
directly to importers or their agents abroad through secured media, subject to observance of following
instructions:

(a) The underlying sales contracts/letters of credit provide for such direct dispatch of export
documents.
(b) ADs shall be satisfied with the arrangement of realization of export proceeds within
statutory period.
(c) ADs shall endorse original transport document retained with them on receipt of payment
against relevant export.
(d) ADs shall, within 14 days from the date of shipment, obtain EXP Form from exporters to
comply with regulatory instructions including reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank.
(e) Exporters’ account with ADs is fully compliant with KYC/AML/CFT guidelines in force.

03. This is to clarify that export documents may also be dispatched by exporters against full
export payment realized in advance. However, ADs shall obtain relevant export documents to adjust
advance payment with related exports.

04. In terms of FE Circular No. 17, dated April 23, 2019, exporters are required to report
transport/shipping information immediately in Bangladesh Bank online reporting portal, and submit
relevant documents within 14 days from the date of shipment, inter alia. Exporters should adhere to
the instructions to observe regulatory compliances as required under the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, 1947. Accordingly, ADs shall follow up with exporters to expedite the process.

Other instructions with regards to export transactions shall remain unchanged. Please bring the
contents of this circular to the notice of your constituents concerned.


Yours faithfully,

(Kazi Rafiqul Hassan)
General Manager
Phone: 9530123