--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 33 Date: October 18, 2021

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Repatriation of export proceeds through Online Payment Gateway Service Providers


Please refer to FE Circular No. 44, dated December 28, 2017 and its subsequent circulars
in terms of which Authorized Dealers (ADs) are allowed to repatriate remittances through Online
Payment Gateway Service Providers (OPGSPs) against small value service exports for which
ADs are required to enter into standing arrangements with internationally recognized OPGSPs
and maintain separate nostro collection account for each OPGSP. Service exporters availing of
this facility are, among others, allowed to open notional accounts with only those OPGSPs
having arrangements with ADs in Bangladesh.

02. To widen the scope of repatriation of income against service exports, it has been
decided that ADs may allow their service exporter-customers to enter into arrangements,
including maintenance of merchant accounts, with international market places/platforms. In
addition to such accounts, service exporters may maintain notional accounts, without limiting to
licensed OPGSPs, with internationally reputed payment service aggregators, payment
facilitators, digital wallets or other legitimate payment systems licensed by the regulatory
authorities concerned. Accordingly, ADs shall facilitate repatriation of service income deposited
in their nostro accounts by international market places/platforms including eligible foreign
payment operators, regardless of having arrangements and maintaining separate nostro collection
accounts. In this context, ADs shall obtain-

(a) detailed information from their service exporter-customers regarding maintenance of
merchant accounts with international market places/platforms and/or notional accounts with
eligible foreign payment operators.

(b) declaration on the nature of services to be provided by service exporter-customers
with supporting information and documents thereon;

(c) undertaking from their customers to the effect that they will arrange repatriation of the
service income within statutory period either by way of (i) concerned market places/platforms or
eligible foreign payment operators, or (ii) credit to their merchant/notional accounts for
immediate transfer to Bangladesh. Accordingly customers’ due diligences and other regulatory
compliances need to be observed.



Cont’d to page-2

--- Page 2 ---
03. While on receipt of inward remittances in nostro accounts on account of service
income by way of international market places/platforms or eligible foreign payment operators as
per 2 above, ADs shall observe following procedures:


(a) ADs shall credit the receipts in equivalent local currency to respective bank accounts,
or arrange to transfer the same to digital wallets maintained with Mobile Financial Service
Providers licensed by Bangladesh Bank. At the option of their service exporter-customers, ADs
may make the fund available to ERQ accounts up to the permissible limit before transfer the
equivalent local currency to respective bank accounts/digital wallets.

(b) In case exporters’ ADs are different, at the option of service exporters for maintaining
ERQ accounts, ADs repatriating service income shall transfer the repatriated fund through
nostro/clearing accounts of Bangladesh Bank to concerned ADs in invoicing currency. For such
transfer, beneficiary ADs will follow reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank.

(c) Regulations on deductions of applicable taxes and payment thereof need to be
complied with.

04. Service income is to be repatriated in permissible currencies as per paragraph 5,
chapter 8 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions-2018, Vol-1 (GFET) and within
statutory period as prescribed at paragraph 13 ibid. Service exporters can operate no accounts
abroad for store of value other than merchant or notional accounts as per 2 above.

05. At the option of international market places/platforms and eligible foreign payment
operators, ADs may maintain KYC and AML/CFT compliant foreign currency accounts and
non-resident Taka accounts in their names as per paragraph 1(i), chapter 13 and paragraph 8(b),
chapter 14 of GFET for payments on account of service income by debit to the accounts, subject
to observance of relevant instructions as noted at 3 above.


06. As usual, ADs shall observe reporting routine to Bangladesh Bank with appropriate
codification and comply with the relevant foreign exchange regulations, AML/CFT norms and
any other relevant laws/regulations in force.

Please bring the contents of this circular to the notice of your all constituents concerned.




Yours faithfully,

(Kazi Rafiqul Hassan)
General Manager
Phone: 9530123