--- Page 1 ---
www.bb.org.bd

Payment Systems Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

PSD Circular—05/2020 Date : May 31, 2020

Managing Director/CEO,
Proposed White Label ATM and Merchant Acquirer and
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Guidelines for White Label ATM and Merchant Acquiring Services.

In order to spread ATM (Automated Teller Machine) and POS (Point of Sales) services in the rural part of
the country, Bangladesh Bank (BB) has decided to allow non-bank private sector entities for setting up necessary
infrastructure in the country as per attached ‘Guidelines for White Label ATM and Merchant Acquiring Services’ for
providing services to the customers’ of Banks, MFSs, PSPs and any other institution as approved by BB.

Such service will fall under the PSO (Payment System Operator) jurisdiction and intended firms (including a
PSO license holder for other services) will require to obtain separate license from BB in extending such services and
will need to follow all existing and upcoming policies, guidelines and standards relating to these services.

These ‘Guidelines for White Label ATM and Merchant Acquiring Services’ are issued herewith in exercise of
the power conferred under section 7A (e) of the Bangladesh Bank Order 1972.

This is of immediate effect.

( Md. Mezbaul Haque )

General Manager
Phone: 9530174

Email: mezbaul.haque@bb.org.bd

Enclosure: Guidelines for White Label ATM and Merchant Acquiring Services.

--- Page 2 ---
Guidelines




for


White Label ATM and

Merchant Acquiring Services









Payment Systems Department


Bangladesh Bank




May 2020

--- Page 3 ---
Page 1 of 6
TABLE OF CONTENTS


1.0 Introduction: ........................................................................................................ 2
2.0 Mandate : ............................................................................................................ 2
3.0 Purpose :...............................................................................................................2
4.0 Scope: ................................................................................................................. 2
5.0 Allowable Services: ............................................................................................ 3
6.0 Parties Involved : ............................................................................................... 3
7.0 Eligibility Criteria : ............................................................................................. 4
8.0 Operational Aspects : ......................................................................................... 4
9.0 Miscellaneous : .................................................................................................. 5

--- Page 4 ---
Page 2 of 6
1.0 Introduction :

The Bangladesh Bank (BB) is mandated by clause 7(A)(e) of the Bangladesh Bank Order 1972 to
make country’s payment and settlement system an effective and efficient one. As a part of the
mandate, the BB has been endeavoring to establish infrastructural facilities and providing policy
measures so that market participants can come up with proper technology and business model to
spread appropriate payment services in the country. Bangladesh Bank generally follows the bank-
led model in most of its initiatives. However, current business model and the participants involved
in bank-led model were not particularly appropriate to achieve wide scale geographical spread of
ATM and POS services specifically to the rural areas.

Hence, to spread ATM services in the unreached peripheries as well as to include new merchants
into the electronic payments network, involvement of non-bank entities is the need of time. These
new entities will deploy, own and operate ATMs and/or acquire merchants to serve the customers
of schedule banks/MFSs/PSPs. These private sector non-bank operators will be termed as White
Label ATM and/or Merchant Acquirer (WLAMA). The WLAMA needs to establish connectivity
with the existing domestic and international ATM/POS Networks and earn its revenue from the
issuing entities (such as Banks/MFSs/PSPs) and acquiring bank for using their ATMs and POSs
respectively.

2.0 Mandate :

Bangladesh Bank is issuing these Guidelines for WLAMA in exercise of the power conferred in
Article 7A (e) of the Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 and Section 49 (1) (O) of the Bank
Companies Act, 1991.

3.0 Purpose :

The purpose of these Guidelines is to:

provide a regulatory framework for the interested non-bank entities to deploy, own and
operate interoperable White Label ATMs and/or merchant acquiring services in
Bangladesh.
II.
spread the reach of banking and retail payment services at an affordable cost throughout
Bangladesh, especially in the rural areas.
4.0 Scope:

These guidelines shall apply for the issuance of license to the interested non-bank entities for
establishing White Label ATMs and to perform both the in-store and e-commerce merchant
acquisition services. These services would be offered to the customers of domestic and
international Banks, MFSs and/or PSPs.

--- Page 5 ---
Page 3 of 6
5.0 Allowable Services :

White-label ATM and POS deployed under these guidelines will not display a label/name of a
bank rather may contain (brand) name of particular WLAMA, Permissible activities under White
label ATM and POSs are :

a) ATM Cash Withdrawal
b) ATM Funds Transfer
c) ATM Mini Statement
d) ATM Balance Inquiry
e) ATM Bill Payment
f) POS/QR Retail Purchase
g) POS/QR Bill Payment
h) Other services as permissible by Bangladesh Bank.

6.0 Parties Involved :

a) White Label ATM and/or Merchant Acquirer (WLAMA): A Non-Bank entity licensed
by the Bangladesh Bank as a Payment System Operator (PSO) to deploy, own and operate
white label ATM and offer in-store merchant acquiring services such as POS/QR
payments. Besides, they may provide e-commerce merchant acquiring facilities as well. A
WLAMA may choose to offer both ATM and merchant acquisition services or any one of
those services.

b) Settlement Bank: Act as the acquiring bank in favor of WLAMA and assume the roles
and responsibilities of an acquiring bank including settlement of transaction and disputes.


c) Issuing Bank or Entity: Banking Company or MFS or PSP that issues payment
instruments (such as Payment Card, Mobile wallet, Electronic wallet etc.) in favor of their
customers through which a customer can access to the services of a WLAMA.

d) National Payment Switch Bangladesh (NPSB): An interoperable platform for payment
and settlement of domestic interbank card-based, account-based and wallet-based
transactions initiated through ATM, POS, Internet Banking and electronic wallets
(provided by Banks, MFSs and PSPs).

e) International Payment Schemes (IPS): A payment platform incorporated outside the
country which operates payment and settlement for both the domestic and international
interbank transactions in multiple countries.

f) Customer: An individual/organization who maintains account or card or e-wallet with
domestic or international Bank or MFS or PSP and is willing to avail services of a
WLAMA.

--- Page 6 ---
Page 4 of 6
7.0 Eligibility Criteria :
a) A WLAMA should be licensed by the Bangladesh Bank as a PSO under the Bangladesh
Payment and Settlement Systems Regulations 2014.
b) The paid-up capital of a WLAMA would be Taka 450 (Four hundred fifty) Million if it
provides ATM services only, an additional bank guarantees of Taka 100 (One Hundred)
Million favouring BB would be required in case of WLAMA serving as both ATM and
merchant acquisition service provider, while Taka 100 (One hundred) Million paid up
capital and 100 (One Hundred) Million bank guarantee is required for entities intended to
provide merchant acquisition services only.
c) A WLAMA must be incorporated in Bangladesh under the Companies Act, 1994 and the
memorandum must contain clauses specifying the types of service(s) they intend to offer.
d) An intended WLAMA must select a schedule bank as a Settlement Bank and submit a
MoU (Memorandum of Understanding) between WLAMA and the Settlement Bank with
its application for license.


8.0 Operational Aspects :


a) A WLAMA may establish its own switching solution or use its settlement bank’s solution
to connect with the local and/or international payment and settlement platforms.

b) The primary connectivity of a WLAMA should be with the NPSB and it must designate a
settlement bank for settling of transactions and disputes relating to this platform. A
WLAMA may choose to join other domestic or international payment platforms (i.e.
IPSs), where they may designate the same settlement bank or a different one for settling
transaction and disputes.
c) A WLAMA must have proper agreement(s) with the related stakeholders such as
settlement bank, domestic and/or International Payment Schemes and with their
merchants. These agreements among others must address the roles and responsibilities of
the concerned parties including consumer protection, arbitration and dispute resolution
mechanisms.
d) A WLAMA must enter into a separate agreement either with its settlement bank or other
schedule bank(s) in order to get an adequate supply of genuine and good quality bank
notes to be fed into their ATMs. However, the responsibility of ensuring the quality of the
notes in the ATMs would be the sole responsibility of the WLAMA.
e) A WLAMA must submit a strategic plan for its ATM and Merchant acquisition business
for the first three year period. This plan should adhere to a minimum deployment quantity
of 100 ATMs and 1000 POSs/QRs per year while the urban to rural deployment ratio has
to be 1:3. The Urban and Rural demarcation will be made as per BRPD Circular no. 18 of
Nov.29, 2012. It is noteworthy here that taking over any existing Bank’s ATM is not
permissible.

--- Page 7 ---
Page 5 of 6
f) A WLAMA must ensure an uninterrupted service for its ATMs and merchant acquisition
devices. In addition, a WLAMA must also ensure the replenishment of cash to all of their
ATMs as and when required.
g) Customers’ payment information is the property of those particular customers and must
not be stored by a WLAMA without proper authorization.
h) A WLAMA intended to provide merchant acquiring services needs to provide a minimum
bank guarantee of Taka 100 (One Hundred) Million initially which may be increased as
the acquisition business grows. This will act as a cushion in case any issue arises regarding
the settlement of merchant accounts.
i) A bank may choose to issue co-branded cards in partnering with a WLAMA.
j) All guidelines, standards and security measures applicable to the banks relating to
ATM/POS operation, including cyber security framework, currency handling etc. shall be
equally applicable to the WLAMAs. All the ATMs and POSs deployed should be
compliant with the latest industry standards including EMV Compliance.
k) Apart from the regular services, a WLAMA may introduce value added services (such as
interoperable cash deposit) with prior approval from Bangladesh Bank.
l) As part of customer service, a WLAMA must run, at a minimum, a 24X7 call centre and
an online portal for receiving complaints and establishing standard dispute resolution
procedures adhering to the related dispute management rules of Bangladesh Bank.
9.0 Miscellaneous :
a) A WLAMA would be permitted to display its own logo, advertisements and offer value
added services as per the regulations. Besides its own logo, each WLAMA must display
logo of NPSB in its entire white label ATM and POS network and the logo of Bangla QR
in its QR displays. A WLAMA would be permitted to display transaction security
campaign, advertisements on its financial products conforming to the regulatory
requirement.
b) A WLAMA cannot charge a customer directly for any transaction. In case of ATM
transaction, Settlement Bank’s account will be credited as per the existing charging policy
and procedures of NPSB and appropriate IPS(s). In case of POS transactions the
Settlement Bank will collect the MDR (Merchant Discount Rate) on behalf of WLAMA.
c) In case of customer complaints, Issuing Bank will communicate with the Settlement Bank
and Settlement Bank, if requires, will communicate with the WLAMA. WLAMA will
share all transactional information with the Settlement Bank and with NPSB for settlement
of disputes as per the Dispute Management Guidelines of NPSB. Disputes arising out of
other payment platforms would be resolved in line with the platform rules and procedures
while the settlement bank will perform the role of an acquiring bank.

--- Page 8 ---
Page 6 of 6
d) Relevant provisions of all guidelines/directives/instructions issued by various departments
of Bangladesh Bank with reference to ATM and merchant acquiring services, operations,
cash handling, security, etc. for banks would also be applicable to the WLAMAs as well.
e) A WLAMA will submit periodic reports as prescribed by Bangladesh Bank and are
subjected to Bangladesh Bank’s Audit, Inspection and Oversight.
f) Bangladesh Bank reserves the right to suspend and/or cancel the license of a WLAMA if it
deems appropriate.
g) WALMA will require paying connection and other fees as determined by Bangladesh
Bank for its connectivity with NPSB.
10. Definitions :
Automated Teller Machine is an electronic device that usually facilitates cash withdrawal, balance
inquiry, funds transfer, bill payment, cash deposits etc to the authorized users from their accounts using
card or mobile phone or other means after proper verification and authentication.
Authentication is a process through which a Payment Service Provider verifies the identity of a customer.
Credit Card is a physical or virtual card that authorizes a person to make payments (for goods and
services) or to withdraw cash with a condition to repay the same within certain time frame after proper
verification and authentication.
Debit Card is a physical or virtual card used to withdraw cash and to make payment (for goods and
services) from customer’s bank account after proper verification and authentication.
e-Wallet is a store where electronic money is preserved.
Merchant Discount Rate (MDR) is the rate charged to a merchant by the acquirer for processing
payments from debit/credit card, e-wallet, m-wallets. The merchant must set up infrastructure and agree to
the rate before accepting debit/credit card, e-wallet, m-wallet as payments.
Mobile Financial Services means e-money services provided against a particular mobile/cell phone
number of a client (termed as Mobile Account), where the record of funds is stored on the electronic
general ledger. These services can be draw-down through specific payment instructions to be issued from
the bearer’s mobile phone or through alternative digital process or device by ensuring authenticity of the
transaction. However, unlike e-money products, 'cash-in' and 'cash-out' and other services as permitted by
BB at agent locations are allowed for MFS accounts
Payment System Operator means an entity licensed by Bangladesh Bank with a view to operating a
clearing and settlement system among the Payment System Participants.
Payment Service Provider means an entity licensed by Bangladesh Bank which provides payment
services directly to customers or to a payment system.
Point of Sales is an electronic device through which funds transfer instruction is initiated from a bank
account, card or wallet in favor of the seller/customer.