--- Page 1 ---
Secretary’s Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

SD Circular no: 01 Date: Ss Se ete ;

Managing Director/Chief Executive Officers of
All Scheduled Banks

Dear Sir,

The Special Regulations of Bangladesh Bank, 2024

In exercise of the powers conferred by article 7A(f), 82(1) and article 82(2)(n) of the
Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972, the Board of Directors of Bangladesh Bank in its 438" meeting
makes the regulations titled “The Special Regulations of Bangladesh Bank, 2024”. These

regulations shall come into force with immediate effect.

The regulations can also be collected from the website (www.bb.org.bd) of Bangladesh
Bank.

Sincerely Yours,

Enclosure: C | &

The Special Regulations of (Mohammad Zahir Hussain)
Bangladesh Bank, 2024 Director (SD)
Banking Sector Reform Taskforce
Phone: 01817513288

--- Page 2 ---
The Special Regulations of Bangladesh Bank, 2024

--- Page 3 ---
aA এ

95

Table of Contents

Preamble

Short Title and Commencement
The Objectives of the Regulations
Definitions

Scope of Application
Appointment of ICF

Disclosure of Information
Co-ordination & Reporting

Implementation of the Report



Rh BR WwW

--- Page 4 ---
Preamble

WHEREAS in spite of the requisite regulatory framework in place, a number of banks
in Bangladesh have been facing multifarious challenges in respect of quality of assets,
corporate governance, policies and compliance of laws and Regulations and thereby
damaging the trust and confidence of the public in general and undermining the
credibility of the banking system as a whole:

AND WHEREAS one of the main functions of Bangladesh Bank is to regulate and
supervise banking companies in Bangladesh in terms of Article 7A(f) of the
Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 127 of 1972) and as such Bangladesh Bank
considers it proper and expedient to undertake a risk-based comprehensive assessment
of the concerned banks to identify the core issues causing problems and to undertake
reforms, where necessary, to preserve trust, stability, and sustainability of the banking
system;

AND WHEREAS for the purpose of proper regulation and supervision, Bangladesh
Bank also considers it proper and expedient to undertake the said assessment by any
International Consulting Firm (as defined below) to ensure a credible report,
acceptable to all the stakeholders including relevant international forums;

NOW THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by Article 82(1) read with
Article 82(2)(n) of the Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 127 of 1972), the
Board of Directors of the Bangladesh Bank hereby makes the following Regulations,
namely:

ile Short Title and Commencement

(1) These regulations shall be called The Special Regulations of Bangladesh
Bank, 2024.

(2) These regulations shall come into force with immediate effect.
Ze The Objectives of the Regulations

The objectives of these regulations shall be to undertake a risk-based Comprehensive
Assessment or a part thereof (as defined below) of the concerned bank(s) by any

--- Page 5 ---
competent International Consulting Firm (as defined below) with a view to initiating
appropriate remedial measures as far as the same may be deemed proper and necessary
in the public interest and for improvement of the state and condition of bank
companies and bank-policies.


Definitions

In these regulations, the following definitions shall apply:






“Bangladesh Bank” means Bangladesh Bank established under the
Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 127 of 1972).

“Banker Books Evidence Act” or “BBEA” means the Banker Books
Evidence Act, 2021 (Act No. 27 of 2021).

“BB Order” means the Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 127 of
1972).

“Bank Company Ain” or “BCA” means the Bank Company Ain, 1991
(Act No. 14 of 1991) (as amended).

“Board” means the Board of Directors of Bangladesh Bank.

“Clients’ Information” means the information as defined under Section
2(1)(h) of the BBEA.

“Comprehensive Assessment” means a risk-based diagnostic study
which includes, Asset Quality Review, Review of Corporate
Governance, Review of bank’s policies, procedures, processes and
compliance of laws and regulations and any other assessment as and
when necessary;

“Contract Document(s)” means the Agreement(s), Contract(s),
Deed(s), Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), as may be entered into
between Bangladesh Bank and the ICF for the purpose of
Comprehensive Assessment.

--- Page 6 ---
“International Consulting Firm” or “ICF” means a firm or corporate
body which has sufficient expertise and experience in foreign market,
other than the country of registration, in conducting risk-based
comprehensive assessment of a bank company including Asset Quality
Review;

(10) “Public Funds” means “Public Funds” as defined in section 2(33) of the
Public Procurement Act, 2006 (Act No. 24 of 2006).

(11) “Public Procurement Act” or “PPA” means the Public Procurement
Act, 2006 (Act No. 24 of 2006).

(12) “Report” means the report of the ICF, which shall be advisory in nature,
on the Comprehensive Assessment.

(13) “Scheduled Bank” means “Scheduled Bank” as defined in Article 2(j)
of the BB Order.

Scope of Application

(1) These Regulations shall apply as and when the Board decides to
undertake Comprehensive Assessment on the concerned bank(s).

(2) All orders, directions and guidelines that may be issued by Bangladesh

Bank pursuant to the BB Order or BCA or any other law for the time
being in force in Bangladesh for the purpose of Comprehensive
Assessment shall be binding upon the Scheduled Banks.

Appointment of ICF



Bangladesh Bank shall appoint any competent International Consulting
Firm for conducting Comprehensive Assessment or part thereof.

Terms and conditions for conducting Comprehensive Assessment or part
thereof, the honorarium and the mode of payment to the ICF shall be
stipulated in the Contract Documents or otherwise.

--- Page 7 ---
The ICF may accomplish the Comprehensive Assessment or part thereof
in as many parts as may be deemed convenient for them;

provided that in such case, separate Terms of Reference (TOR) for each
part shall have to be agreed upon between Bangladesh Bank and the ICF.

In procuring mentioned services, the relevant provisions of the PPA shall
be applicable with the exception described in the proviso in section
3(2)(d).

Disclosure of Information

General permission is hereby accorded by Bangladesh Bank to the Scheduled
Banks to furnish Clients’ Information to the ICF for the purpose of conducting
Comprehensive Assessment.

Co-ordination & Reporting



Bangladesh Bank shall assign a particular department to co-ordinate the
activities of the ICF with the Scheduled Banks in relation to the
Comprehensive Assessment.

The ICF shall submit a Report to the Governor of Bangladesh Bank as
per the Contract Document(s).

Implementation of the Report

The Governor of Bangladesh Bank shall submit the Report to the Board to take
necessary measures in accordance with the applicable law(s).