--- Page 1 ---
Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office, Dhaka.
Website: www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

BFIU Circular Letter No. 03/2012
Date: 10 October, 2012


Chief Executive Officer
All Reporting Agencies under Section 2(20) of Anti Terrorism Act, 2009 (including amendment
of 2012).

Instructions to be followed for compliance of Freezing Accounts of Individuals or
Institutions and Other Issues under the Sanction List of Different Resolutions of United
Nations Security Council

Dear Sir,


As a member of United Nations, Bangladesh is obliged to comply with the instructions of
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council under Chapter-VII of UN Charter. Besides,
instructions are effective to comply with the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1267
and its subsequent resolutions and other resolutions to freeze without delay any
account/transaction operated in the name of the person(s) or institution(s) listed in those
resolutions or institution(s) owned or controlled directly or indirectly by them under sections
15(3) and 17(e) of Anti Terrorism Act, 2009 (including amendment of 2012).


The following instructions are issued as per power conferred in section 15(1)(h) of Anti
Terrorism Act, 2009 (including amendment of 2012) for compliance by all reporting agencies
included in section 2(20) of this act:


1. The instructions contained in the United Nations Security Council Resolution
1267(1999) and its subsequent resolutions and other resolutions have to be complied and if any
account/transaction operated in the name of the person(s) or institution(s) listed in those
resolutions or in the name of institution(s) owned or controlled directly or indirectly by them; the
account(s) have to be frozen without delay and the same have to be reported to this unit.


2. Any account/transaction operated in the name of the person(s) or institution(s) listed by
the Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh on the basis of the Resolution
1373(2001) adopted by the United Nations Security Council, or institution(s) owned or
controlled directly or indirectly by them; the account(s) have to be frozen without delay and the
same have to be reported to this unit.


3. Any account/transaction operated in the name of the person(s) or institution(s) listed in
‘Resolutions relating to the prevention, suppression and disruption of proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and its financing’, adopted by the Security Council under United Nations

--- Page 2 ---
Charter-VII, or in the name of institution(s) owned or controlled directly or indirectly by them;
the account(s) have to be frozen without delay and the same have to be reported to this unit.


4. Necessary measures have to be taken by collecting the list prepared under those
resolutions proactively from the UN website (http://www.un.org/sc/committees/index.shtml).

You are instructed to provide necessary directions to all concerned of your institution to
ensure proper compliance of the aforesaid instructions.


Please acknowledge receipt.



Yours faithfully,

Sd/-
(Debaprosad Debnath)
General Manager
Tel: 9530118