--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd

FE Circular No. 08 Date: March 10, 2024

Managing Director/CEO
Head Office of
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,

Settlement of import and export transactions through counter-trade arrangements

Attention of Commercial Banks is invited to paragraph 24, chapter 7, and paragraph 5,
chapter 8 of the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions-2018 (GFET), Vol-1 in terms of
which settlement of payments against trade transactions is primarily made in any convertible
foreign currency, inter alia.

02. To widen the scope in settlement of trade payments, it has been decided that
Bangladeshi parties (exporters/importers/traders) may voluntarily enter into counter-trade
arrangements with counterparts abroad for settlement of import payments into Bangladesh
against proceeds of goods exported from Bangladesh. Banks may open and maintain Escrow
accounts in relevant approved currency, with intimation to Bangladesh Bank, in the name of
foreign counterparts or jointly with Bangladeshi parties, to execute the settlement of payments.
Operational procedures for settlement of payments under counter-trade arrangements are as
follows:

(a) Credits to Escrow accounts can be made out of import payments in approved foreign
currencies received from importers through local banking channel supported by
documentary evidences.
(b) The accounts can be debited for export payments, net of permissible commission/
service charges, supported by documentary evidences to exporters through local
banking channel.
(c) Agreed commission/service charges, on deduction of applicable taxes, will be payable
to Bangladeshi parties in equivalent Taka from the Escrow accounts.
(d) No interest/profit will be payable on balances held in Escrow accounts but
unencumbered balances can be transferred, at the instructions of account holders, to
other Escrow accounts in Bangladesh for facilitating payments against exports under
counter-trade arrangements.

Cont’d to page-2

--- Page 2 ---
03. In case of underlying agreement between parties, Escrow accounts as per
authorization at para 2 above may be opened and maintained in Bangladeshi Taka. In this case,
import payments can be credited to the accounts against import payments received in Taka from
importers’ banks. The balances held in Taka accounts can be used for settlement of local
disbursement as per 2(b) and 2(c) above. As usual, the accounts will bear no interest/profit.

04. Bangladeshi parties shall follow up with their counterparts so that the position in
Escrow accounts can be balanced within periodical intervals.


05. Subject to approval from Bangladesh Bank, Bangladeshi parties can open and
maintain Escrow accounts in the countries of their counterparts for settlement of trade
transactions under counter-trade arrangements.

06. All imports and exports are subject to relevant regulatory compliance and shall be
competitive in price. ADs executing transactions on behalf of importers and making payments to
Escrow accounts as per above instructions shall report the same to Bangladesh Bank in IMP
Form procedures with suitable mark as ‘Counter-trade’ along with matching formalities. Usual
EXP formalities need to be observed for export transactions including reporting of proceeds
realization with suitable mark as ‘Counter-trade’.

07. Banks shall be satisfied with the bonafides of the underlying transactions and shall
comply with KYC and AML/CFT standards, including reporting routines to Bangladesh Bank on
related Online Systems and relevant schedule of statements.

The above instructions, however, shall not be applicable for transactions through the
ACU mechanism. Other relevant instructions regarding trade transactions shall remain
unchanged. You are advised to bring the contents of this circular to the notice of your clientele
concerned.

Yours faithfully,


(Md. Sarwar Hossain)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123