--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www.bb.org.bd


FE Circular No. 21






Date: October 17, 2024

All Authorized Dealers in
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh

Dear Sirs,

Remittance of aircraft lease rental by airlines incorporated in Bangladesh

Attention of Authorized Dealers (ADs) is invited to the present practice regarding the
cases of remittances of Aircraft lease rentals by airlines incorporated in Bangladesh wherein
specific approval from Bangladesh Bank is required for remittances on case to case basis. It has
now been decided that ADs may effect remittances on account of lease rentals by the airlines
incorporated in Bangladesh up to the guaranteed hours subject to bonafides according to the
following drill:


(A) Application and required documents:


i) Application of the applicant company;
ii) Permission letter of competent authority allowing to operate the rental aircraft in
favor of the applicant company;
iii) Copy of valid agreement;
iv) Copy of invoices
v) An audited statement showing the opening balance, earning, expenditure and net
amount (surplus/deficit) pertaining to the operation of rental aircraft;
vi) Proof of challans pertaining to payment of all applicable taxes or certificate of
exemption issued by relevant tax authority;
vii) An undertaking from the applicant company to the effect that, in case of wrong or
excess remittance, the amount remitted will be repatriated to Bangladesh
immediately on demand.

(B) Examination and processing by AD:

(a) ADs shall ensure that the applicant is regular in submission of returns to
Bangladesh Bank and repatriation of surplus earnings in accordance with FE Circular
No. 21, dated July 18, 2018 and its subsequent circulars.
(b) After scrutinizing the application along with the supporting documents submitted
and establishing the bonafides, AD shall effect the remittance. In this case, ADs shall
utilize first foreign currency fund, if any, in their foreign currency account and later
remainder from Taka accounts.
Cont’d to page-2

--- Page 2 ---
(c) ADs shall maintain separate file for each company for verification by Bangladesh
Bank inspection team and report the transactions to the concerned area office of
Bangladesh Bank.

02. Remittances under authority of this circular may only be made through an AD branch
designated by the remitters for the purpose with intimation to Bangladesh Bank, head
office/concerned area office of Bangladesh Bank.

Please acknowledge receipt and bring these instructions to the notice of all concerned.


Yours faithfully,

(Md. Harun-Ar-Rashid)
Director (FEPD)
Phone: 9530123