--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bb.org.bd

Green Banking and CSR Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.


Dear Sir,

Guidelines on School Banking

With a view to enhancing financial inclusion of the country by ensuring the participation of
school students in the economic viz-a-viz banking activities through savings and creating savings
attitude among students through involving them in the modern banking service and technology,
Bangladesh Bank advised all scheduled banks to introduce School Banking in 2010. In
consequence to that, most of the banks have introduced school banking and have achieved
significant progress in School Banking activities. To reach banking services to the students in an
appropriate manner through ensuring more transparency, awareness and acceleration into this
activity, following guidelines on operation of School Banking Activities is issued to all
scheduled banks for their compliance:

1. Opening of Account : Students age of six years to below eighteen years will be able to
open account under School Banking Operation1;

2. Operation of Account: School Banking account have to be operated through
father/mother or Legal Guardian of the students;

3. Account Opening Form: Existing Uniform Account Opening Form and KYC Form will
be used to open School Banking accounts and instructions issued vide Circular Letter no.
AMLD-1(policy)/2008-2324, dated June 30, 2008 of Bangladesh Financial Intelligence
Unit will be applicable. For such accounts, both Guardian and student have to fill up
Personal Information part of Account Opening Form and both forms must be signed by
the legal guardian;

1 The minimum age for primary education is 6 years under National Education Policy 2010 and all citizens
under 18 years are considered as minor according to The Majority Act, 1875 (Section-3)

GBCSRD Circular No: 07


Managing Director/Chief Executive
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

October 28, 2013
Date -----------------------
Kartik 13, 1420

--- Page 2 ---
4. Nature of Account: Such type of accounts will be opened as Savings Account. However,
if necessary, any type saving schemes can be opened by transferring balance from these
accounts;

5. Minimum Initial Deposit: Minimum initial deposit for such accounts will be Tk. 100/-
(one hundred);

6. Nationality: Both the account holder and Guardian/Legal Guardian will be citizen of
Bangladesh;

7. Required Documents to Open Account: Proper KYC of both the account holder and
account operator must be ensured. In this context, the attested photocopies of birth
registration certificate and institutional identity card/Certificate issued by Educational
Institute/Receipt of School Fees of latest month of students have to be collected. All these
documents must be preserved in the bank;

8. Sources of Fund of Account Holder: The legal source of fund deposited in the account
must be verified and related transactions must be rational in this respect;

9. ATM Card: ATM card (only debit card) can be issued against this type of account.
Maximum limit for monthly withdrawal through ATM Card and Point of Sales (POS)
will be Tk. 2000/-. This limit may be increased up to Tk. 5000/- on request of the
Guardian. There will be a system of SMS Transaction Alert to the mobile number of
account holders’ guardian’s. (transaction details will be available to the guardian’s mobile
through SMS just after the transaction taken place);

10. Service Charge/Fee: No service charge/fee will be imposed on this type of account
except government fees. If ATM Card is issued against School Banking accounts, ATM
Card issue fee and renewal fee will be considered from the same point of view.

11. Collection of Fees from Students: Banks can collect monthly fee of students on behalf
of educational institutions (by having understanding with educational institutions)
through such accounts. Banks will inspire the educational institutions so that the students
of every school can be brought under banking services;

12. Establishment of School banking Counter/Desk: Concerned bank branches may
establish separate School banking Counter/Desk to facilitate banking activities among
students. Banks will provide deposit/withdrawal services along with other banking
services through this counter. Moreover, bank branches may provide this service in one
or more fixed day by opening booth in the premises of educational institutions by having
their consent;

--- Page 3 ---
13. Deposit of scholarship/stipend Benefit: All kinds of scholarship/stipend of students
can be deposited through School Banking Account. In this regard, scholarship/stipend
provider Government/Semi-Government/Autonomous/ Private institutions have to sign a
Memorandum of Understanding with the concerned banks;

14. Education Insurance: Concerned banks can provide education insurance facility to
these accounts as such if any student faces financial crisis to run his/her education due to
family/natural causes then, it will be possible to facilitate them under this insurance
coverage;

15. Reporting and Disclosure of School Banking Activities: Banks shall have to submit
the Progress Report (as per enclosed format) of their School Banking Activities to the
Green Banking and CSR Department of Bangladesh Bank on quarterly basis. This report
has to be submitted within the next 15 (fifteen) days of each quarter. Banks will submit
their first quarterly report based on December 31, 2013 within January 15, 2014. Besides
this, banks will disclose the updated information on school banking activities in their
annual report and website.

16. Others:
16.1. Banks will also comply with related acts, rules, regulation and policy guidelines
circulated by Bangladesh Bank in case of School Banking accounts;

16.2. Whenever account holder (student) will turn into 18 years; the account will be
transformed into regular savings account with his/her consent and then will be
continued. In this regard, related rules-regulations and policy guideline circulated by
Bangladesh bank will be applicable as usual;

Mentionably, in case of converting into savings accounts, full KYC must be
accomplished and others declaration letter with TP must be obtained. After completing
eighteen years of the account holder and before converting into a regular savings
account, no withdrawal will be allowed (except account closure) in that period;

16.3. This guideline will also be applicable for School Banking accounts which have
been opened before issuing this circular.

These directions made herewith by this circular will come into force with immediate effect.

Please acknowledge receipt.
Yours faithfully,

(Md. Khurshid Alam)
General Manager
Phone: 9530320
Fax: 9530327
E-mail: gm.gbcsrd@bb.org.bd