--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 11

Website: www.bb.org.bd

Green Banking and CSR Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

September 11, 2013
GBCSRD Circular Letter No- 05 Date: ------------------------------







Vadro 27, 1420


Managing Directors/Chief Executives
NRB Commercial Bank Limited/South Bangla Agricultural and Commerce Bank Limited/Union
Bank Limited/Meghna Bank Limited/Midland Bank Limited/The Farmers Bank Limited/NRB Bank
Limited/Modhumoti Bank Limited/NRB Global Bank Limited


Dear Sir,

Policy Guidelines for Green Banking

Please refer to BRPD Circular No.02 dated February 27, 2011 and BRPD Circular Letter No. 07
dated July 22, 2012 on the captioned subject. Through the circular and circular letter, Policy
Guidelines for Green Banking for banks and a reporting format were issued.

Now, it has been decided to issue a policy guideline for Green Banking for the banks scheduled in
2013 in the following manner:

Introduction

You are aware that global warming is an issue that calls for a global response. The rapid change in
climate will be too great to allow many eco-systems to suitably adapt, since the change have direct
impact on biodiversity, agriculture, forestry, dry land, water resources and human health. Due to
unusual weather pattern, rising greenhouse gas, declining air quality etc. society demands that
business also take responsibility in safeguarding the planet. Green finance as a part of Green
Banking makes great contribution to the transition to resource-efficient and low carbon industries
i.e. green industry and green economy in general. Green banking is a component of the global
initiative by a group of stakeholders to save environment. The state of environment in Bangladesh is
rapidly deteriorating. The key areas of environmental degradation cover air pollution, water
pollution and scarcity, encroachment of rivers, improper disposal of industrial, medical and house-
hold waste, deforestation and loss of open space and loss of biodiversity. In addition, Bangladesh is
one of the most climate change vulnerable countries. In line with global development and response
to the environmental degradation, financial sector in Bangladesh should play important roles as one
of the key stake holders.

In response to the above, urgent measures are required by stake holders for sustainable development
and thereby save the planet. Banks as financial intermediary hold a unique position in an economic

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 11

system that can affect production, business and other economic activities through their financing
activities and thus may contribute to pollute environment. Moreover, energy and water efficiency
and waste reduction are of high concern for banks. Green banks or environmentally responsible
banks do not only improve their own standards but also affect socially responsible behavior of other
business.

Adopting Green Banking Policy

Now it is the high time for the banks to adopt a comprehensive Green Banking Policy in a formal
and structured manner in line with global norms so as to protect environmental degradation and
ensure sustainable banking practices. With a view to developing green banking practices in the
country, an indicative Green Banking Policy and Strategy framework has been developed for the
banks in the following manner:

Green Banking Policy needs to be covered through time frame work which will be segregated into 3
phases.

1. Phase-I

Banks are to develop green banking policies and show general commitment on environment
through in-house performance. The time lining for the actions to be taken under Phase-I should not
exceed June 30, 2014.

1.1 Policy Formulation and Governance

Banks shall formulate and adopt broad environmental or Green Banking policy and strategy
approved by their Board of Directors. A high powered Committee comprises of directors from the
Board in should be responsible to review the banks’ environmental policies, strategies and program.
Banks shall approve a considerable fund in their annual budget allocation for green banking. Banks
are required to establish a separate Green Banking Unit or Cell having the responsibility of
designing, evaluating and administering related green banking issues of the banks. A senior
executive should be assigned with the responsibility of heading the unit. The unit will report to the
high powered committee time to time.

1.2 Incorporation of Environmental Risk in CRM

Banks shall comply with the instructions stipulated in the detailed guidelines on Environmental
Risk Management (ERM) in consideration of a part of the Green Banking Policy. Bank shall
incorporate Environmental and Climate Change Risk as part of the existing overall credit risk
methodology prescribed to assess a prospective borrower from both credit and environmental risk
point of view. This will include integrating environmental risks in the checklists, audit guidelines
and reporting formats. All of this will help to mainstream Environmental Risk that cover possible
sources of Environmental Risk such as Land use, Climate change related events (cyclone, drought),
animal diseases/pathogens such as avian influenza, solid waste including waste feed, animal waste,
carcasses, sediments, wastewater discharges, hazardous materials, etc will be reviewed under
Environmental Due Diligence (EDD) checklists.

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 of 11

1.3 Initiating In-house Environment Management

Banks shall prepare an inventory of the consumption of water, paper, electricity, energy etc. by its
offices and branches in different places. Then it should take measures to save electricity, water and
paper consumption. A 'Green Office Guide' or at least a set of general instructions should be
circulated to the employees for efficient use of electricity, water, paper and reuse of equipments. In
place of relying on printed documents, online communication should be extensively used (where
possible) for office management and make sure that the printers are defaulted to duplex for double-
side printing to save papers. Banks may apply Eco-font in printing to reduce use of ink, use scrap
paper as notepads and avoid disposable cups/glasses to become more eco- friendly. Installation of
energy efficient electronic equipments and automatic shutdown of computers, fans, lights, air
coolers etc. will help reducing electricity consumption. Energy saving bulbs should replace normal
bulbs in branches/offices of the banks. Banks should make plan to use solar energy at their premises
to save electricity. Banks should take steps to save energy from corporate business travel and
encourage employees to purchase energy efficient cars (that consume less fuel) can reduce gas and
petroleum consumption. Banks should give more emphasis to make the easiest way to help
environment by eliminating paper waste, saving gas and carbon emission, reducing printing costs
and postage expenses.

As per BRPD Circular No. 18 dated November 29, 2012, solar energy system has to be in place in
SME/Agricultural branch.

1.4 Introducing Green finance

Eco friendly business activities and energy efficient industries will be given preference in financing
by banks. Environmental infrastructure such as renewable energy project, clean water supply
project, wastewater treatment plant, solid and hazardous waste disposal plant, bio-gas plant, bio-
fertilizer plant should be encouraged and financed by banks. Consumer credit programs may be
applied for promoting environmental practices among clients.

1.5 Creation of Climate Risk Fund

Banks should finance the economic activities of the flood, cyclone and drought prone areas at the
regular interest rate without charging additional risk premium. However, banks should assess their
environmental risks for financing the sectors in different areas for creating a Climate Change Risk
Fund. This will be used in case of emergency. Banks would ensure regular financing flows in these
vulnerable areas and sectors. The fund could be created as part of banks’ CSR expenditures.

1.6 Introducing Green Marketing

Green marketing is the marketing of products that are presumed to be environmentally safe. Green
marketing incorporates a broad range of activities, including product modification, changes to the
production process, packaging changes, as well as modifying advertising. It refers to the process of
selling products and/or services based on their environmental benefits. Such a product or service
may be environmentally friendly in itself or produced and/or packaged in an environmentally
friendly way. Banks should use environmental causes for marketing their services to consumer.
Green marketing is expected to help awareness development among common people.

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 11

1.7 Online Banking

Online banking is the practice of making bank transactions or paying bills via the Internet on a
secure website of the respective bank that allows the customers to make deposits, withdrawals and
pay bills.
Banks should give more emphasis to make the easiest way to help environment by eliminating
paper waste, saving gas and carbon emission, reducing printing costs and postage expenses.

1.8 Supporting Employee Training, Consumer Awareness and Green Event

Employee awareness development and training on environmental and social risk and the relevant
issues should be a continuous process as part of the banks’ Human Recourse Development.
Awareness development among consumers and clients would be a continuous job of a bank under
its public relation department.

1.9 Disclosure and Reporting of Green Banking Activities

Banks shall report on the initiatives/practices to Green Banking and CSR Department of
Bangladesh Bank in specified format (Annexure-A) on quarterly basis and disclose in their
respective websites. Banks have to submit the report within the next 15 days of each quarter.

2. Phase-II

The time lining for the actions to be taken under Phase-II should not exceed December 31, 2014.

2.1 Sector Specific Environmental Policies

Banks need to formulate strategies to design specific policies for different environmental sensitive
sectors such as Agriculture, Agri-business (Poultry and Dairy), Agro farming, Leather(Tannery),
Fisheries, Textile and Apparels, Renewable Energy, Pulp and Paper, Sugar and distilleries,
Construction and Housing, Engineering and Basic Metal, Chemicals (Fertilizers, Pesticides and
Pharmaceuticals), Rubber and Plastic Industry, Hospital/Clinic, Chemical Trading, Brick
Manufacturing, Ship breaking etc.

2.2 Green Strategic Planning

A bank should determine green targets to be attained through strategic planning. Banks should
determine a set of achievable targets and strategies, and disclose these in their annual reports and
websites for green financing and in-house environment management as well. For in-house
environment management, the target areas should cover attaining energy efficiency in the form of
the use of renewable energy, reduction of electricity, gas, and petrol consumption, reduction of
Green House Gas (GHG) emissions, issuance of e-statements, electronic bill pay, saving papers,
environment friendly office buildings etc. For Green Financing, the target areas should cover
reducing loans for certain environmentally harmful activities, attaining a particular percentage of
environmental loans as percentage of total, introducing eco-friendly financial products etc.

2.3 Setting up Green Branches

A Green Branch should be featured by the provision of the maximum use of natural light, use of
renewable energy, use of energy saving bulbs and other equipments, reduced water and electricity
use, use of recycled water etc. Such a branch of a bank would be specifically designated as a ‘Green

--- Page 5 ---
Page 5 of 11

Branch’. A Green Branch will be entitled to display a special logo approved by Bangladesh Bank.
The criteria for certification of a ‘Green Branch’ will be circulated by Bangladesh Bank in due
course of time.

2.4 Improved In-house Environment Management

Strategy of reuse, recycling of materials and equipments, and source reduction and waste
minimization strategy should be part of in-house environmental management in Phase-II. Banks
should increasingly rely on virtual meeting through the use of video conferencing in lieu of physical
travel which would help saving cost and energy.

2.5 Formulation of Bank Specific Environmental Risk Management Plan and Guidelines

A bank should develop and follow an environmental risk management manual or guidelines in their
assessment and monitoring of project and working capital loans. In addition to the compliance of
national regulation the banks may set internationally accepted higher environmental standards. In
this connection, Green initiatives by a group of banks will not only be effective but will also offer
competitive advantage. Banks’ alliances may prepare standard and guidelines for themselves for
improving Green Banking practices.

2.6 Rigorous Programs to Educate Clients

Clients and business houses should be encouraged and influenced to comply with the environmental
regulations and undertake resource efficient and environmental activities. Banks should introduce
rigorous programs to educate clients.

2.7 Disclosure and Reporting of Green Banking Activities

Banks should start publishing independent Green Banking and Sustainability reports showing past
performances, current activities, and future initiatives. Updated and detailed information about
banks’ environmental activities and performances of major clients should be disclosed.

3. Phase-III:

A system of Environmental Management should be in place in a bank before the initiation of the
activities of Phase-III. Banks are expected to address the whole eco-system through environment
friendly initiatives and introducing innovative products. Standard environmental reporting with
external verification should be part of the phase. The time lining for the actions to be taken under
Phase-III should not exceed June 30, 2015.

3.1 Designing and Introducing Innovative Products

Alongside avoiding negative impacts on environment through banking activities, Banks are
expected to introduce environment friendly innovative green products to address the core
environmental challenges of the country.

3.2 Reporting in Standard Format with External Verification

Banks should publish independent Green Annual Report following internationally accepted format
like Global Reporting Initiatives (GRI) targeting their stakeholders. There should be arrangement
for verification of these publications by an independent agency or acceptable third party.

--- Page 6 ---
Page 6 of 11


4. Reporting Green Banking Practices on Quarterly Basis

Banks shall report their initiatives/activities under the said program to Green Banking and CSR
Department of Bangladesh Bank in specified format (Annexure-A) on quarterly basis. Banks shall
submit their first quarterly report on September 30, 2013 basis within October 15, 2013 and
similarly they will be required to continue to submit reports on the subsequent quarters within the
next 15 days of the respective quarter end.

Banks shall keep their annual report and websites updated with the disclosures on green banking
initiatives/activities.


5. The compliant banks practicing Green Banking will have the following preferential
treatments:

(i) BB will award points to banks on Management component while computing CAMELS rating
where there will ultimately be a positive impact on overall rating of a bank.

(ii) BB will declare the names of the Top Ten banks for their overall performance in green banking
activities in the BB websites.

(iii) BB will actively consider green banking activities/practices of a bank while according
permission for opening new bank branch.


Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours sincerely,



(Khondkar Morshed Millat)
General Manager ((In-charge)
Phone: 9530292
Fax: 9530327
E-mail: morshed.millat@bb.org.bd

--- Page 7 ---
Page 7 of 11

1.1
Policy Formulation and Governance
Yes
No
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Quarter 4
Total
Remarks
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Quarter 4
Total
Remarks
Yes
No
1.2
Incorporation of Environmental Risk in Core Risks Management (CRM)
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Quarter 4
Total
Remarks
UC (standard)
SMA
SS
DF
BL
No. of projects
(Name of the FI)
Statement on Green Banking as of dd/mm/yyyy
Remarks
Remarks
Composition (Name,
Designation & Deptt.)
1.1.1
Amount(in million taka)
Total Amount Disbursed (in
million Taka)
High
Total Number
Loan classification as of Quarter End
High
Formulation and Board/Regional Head approval of Green Banking
Policy
1.1.2
Moderate
No. of Projects applicable for Environmental Due Dilligence (EDD)
1.2.2
1.2.1
Low
No. of Projects Rated (Environmental Risk Rating)
1.1.3
Climate Risk Fund
High
Climate Risk Fund
Marketing, Training and Capacity Building
Green Finance
Moderate
Utilization of Funds (in million Taka)
Allocation of Fund in the Budget for Green Banking (in million Taka)
1.1.4
Formation of Green Banking Unit
Moderate
Green Finance
Rated Projects financed
Low
Low
Marketing, Training and Capacity Building
1.2.3
Annexure-A

--- Page 8 ---
Page 8 of 11

1.3
Initiating In-house Environment Management
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Quarter 4
Total
Remarks
1.3.1
1.3.2
1.3.3
Yes
No
1.3.6
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Quarter 4
Total
Remarks
1.3.7
1.3.4
Introduction of Green Office Guide or General Instructions
Pin Points of Green Office Guide or General Instructions
1.3.5
Inventory Details
Energy Consumption (in million Taka)
Electricity
Gas
Fuel
Consumption of Paper (in million Taka)
Others (Please Specify)
Consumption of Water (in million Taka)
Remarks
No. of Branches and Booths (Data in each quarter will reflect the
cumulative figure)
No. of Booths powered by Solar Energy (Data in each quarter will
reflect the cumulative figure)
No. of Branches powered by Solar Energy (Data in each quarter will
reflect the cumulative figure)

--- Page 9 ---
Page 9 of 11

1.4
Introducing Green Finance
Quarter 4
Remarks
Number
Amount
Number
Amount Number
Amount Number
Number
Amount
Green Finance at reduce rate of interest
ETP
For Installation of ETP (Amount Disbursed)
Projects financed having ETP(Full amount
disbursed)
Bio-gas Plant
Total
Solar Panel/Renewable Energy Plant
Bio-fertilizer Plant
Amount in million Taka
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Hybrid Hoffman Kiln (HHK)
Others (Please specify)
1.5
Utilization of Climate Risk Fund
Quarter 4
Total
1.5.1
Remarks
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Fund for part of CSR activities (event) related to
Climate Change (in million Taka)
Fund for part of CSR activities (Project) related to
Climate Change (in million Taka)
1.5.2

--- Page 10 ---
Page 10 of 11

1.6
Introducing Green Marketing
1.6.1
Introduction of Green Banking Products
(Please Specify)
1.7
Online Banking
Quarter 4
Total
1.7.5
1.7.4
Mobile/SMS
Banking
Quarter 1
Remarks
Internet Banking
1.7.3
No. of Total Accounts
1.7.1
No. of ATM (Data in each
quarter will reflect the
cumulative figure)
Own
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
1.7.2
Online Banking
No. of Total Branches
No. of Branches with online coverage
Shared
No. of Accounts facilitated with
Internet Banking
No. of Accounts facilitated with
Mobile/SMS Banking
% of Accounts facilitated with Internet
Banking
% of Accounts facilitated with
Mobile/SMS Banking
Others (Please specify)

--- Page 11 ---
Page 11 of 11

1.8
Disclosure of Green Banking Activities
Preparation of Independent Green Banking & Sustainability
Report
Media
Disclosure in
Annual Repot
Website
2.1
Sector Specific Environment Policy
2.1.2
No
Remarks
2.1.1
Formulation of Sector Specific Environment Policy (Under
Phase 2) (If yes, please give the pin points in a separate
sheet)
Yes
Name of the Sectors for which Specific Environment Policy
Formulated
2.2
Green Strategic Planning
2.2.1
Formulation of Green Strategic Planning (If yes, please
describe in a separate sheet)
Yes
No
Remarks
2.3
Environment Risk Management Plan
2.3.1
Formulation of Banks Specific Environment Risk
Management Plan and Guideline
Yes
No
Remarks