--- Page 1 ---
Page | 1

SME & Special Programs Department
SREUP PMU
BANGLADESH BANK
(Central Bank of Bangladesh)
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh

SMESPD Circular No.: 01
Dated : March 31, 2019

CEOs/MDs
All Banks and Financial Institutions in Bangladesh
Head Office
Dhaka
Dear Sirs,

Loan fund for pre-finance under Program to Support Safety Retrofits and
Environmental Upgrades in the Bangladeshi Ready-Made Garments (RMG) Sector
Project (SREUP) (BD-2230322)

01. Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh has constituted a Loan fund in
Bangladesh Bank to support the RMG factories through medium to long term finance under
the “Program to Support Safety Retrofits and Environmental Upgrades in the Bangladeshi
Ready-Made Garments (RMG) Sector Project (SREUP)” sponsored by AFD (Agence
Française de Développement)

02. The loan fund size of the project is EUR 50 million. Technical Assistance (TA)
component for Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) & RMG factories is also offered
under SREUP sponsored by European Union (EU), Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW),
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and Bangladesh Bank. The total fund
size for TA is EUR 14.29 million.

03. PFIs will be provided with pre-finance for disbursing the credit to eligible RMG factories
under the loan fund for Safety Retrofits and Environmental Up-gradation.

04. A Guideline comprising policies and procedures of this project has been developed. The
fund will be governed by this Guideline for SREUP which is attached with this Circular at
annexure-5.

05. The loans provided by the PFI to an end borrower of RMG sector (named Sub-loan)
which is described in details in the Guideline of SREUP.


50080

--- Page 2 ---
Page | 2

Major features of the Sub-Loans are:

Lender
: Participating banks and non-bank financial institutions
(PFIs);
ii.
End Borrower
: Eligible clients (on RMG Sector) of PFIs
iii.
Currency
: Bangladesh Taka
iv.
Maximum
loan amount
: 1. BDT-equivalent of EUR 1 million.
2. May be extended up to BDT-equivalent of EUR 3 million
in case of (i) major environmental up-gradation or (ii) any
other duly justified and documented case
Interest rate:
: Maximum 7% per annum.
vi.
Maturity
: 1. Usually 3 to 5 years
2. May be extended up to 7 years in the case of (i) major
environmental up-gradation or (ii) any other duly justified
and documented case
vii.
Nature
of
works
: Safety remediation, environmental and social up-gradation
of RMG factories.
viii.
Incentive
: End borrower & PFIs will get Investment Grant as incentive
for full utilization and completing the sub-projects
accurately.
ix.
Credit Risk
: PFIs will have to bear the credit risk of end-borrowers
Collateral
: Decided by PFIs following BB’s prudential guidelines
xi.
Fees
: As per circular of BRPD and standard practice of the PFIs.
No excessive fees (i.e. beyond usual bank and market
practice) shall be applied by PFIs to end-borrowers under
the sub-project.
xii.
Installments
: In general, interest will be charged on quarterly basis for
end borrowers according to their type of loans.
xiii.
Others
: a. Factories may avail both facilities if it is found they are
eligible for investments; but at first safety retrofits has to be
done and then environment & social up-gradation.
b. Factories which have already completed their safety
remediation and can provide evidence of full compliance to
the Corrective Action Plan (CAP) with positive review by
the
Independent
Technical
Assessors;
or
which
simultaneously undertake to conduct their safety-related
investments under the project will be eligible for their
voluntary investments related to environment and/or social
up-gradation to be financed under the loan funds

--- Page 3 ---
Page | 3

06. Terms and conditions of On-Lending Loan (OLL):

“On-Lending Loan” means the loan granted by Bangladesh Bank to PFIs under SREUP. The
features of OLL are:

i. Lender: Bangladesh bank.
ii. Borrower: Eligible PFIs.
iii. Amount: Synchronized with that of the respective sub-loan.
iv. Currency: Bangladesh Taka (BDT)
v. Grace period: Synchronized with that of the respective sub-loan.
vi. Maturity: Synchronized with that of the respective sub-loan.
vii. Interest Rate: 3.5%.
ix. Repayment: Quarterly and will be synchronized with that of the respective sub-
loans.
In case of loan prepayment, PFIs should not impose any charges/fees to
the end borrower for the early settlement or prepayment, as well as
Bangladesh Bank will not impose any penalty to PFIs for this.
x. Collateral: Current account of concerned PFI maintained with Bangladesh Bank.
xi. Penalty/ Penal interest: In case the PFI is found to have received OLL under the
scheme on the basis of such statement and information
which may subsequently be proved false or incorrect,
Bangladesh Bank shall have the right to impose penal
interest. In case of any overdue amount, PFIs will have to
pay a penalty of 2% of the sub project OLL for a maximum
of 3 working days then a penalty at bank rate above the
project on-lending rate for subsequent days on due amount.
In case of false/fake information, excess charge at the bank
rate over the OLL interest rate will be applied as penalty on
the amount of OLL
In such cases, Bangladesh Bank will recover the entire
outstanding loans with due interest plus applicable penal
interest by way of debiting the current account of the
concerned PFI maintained with Bangladesh Bank.

07. Eligibility Criteria for Participating RMG factories

 RMG companies owning both a RMG factory and the building where the factory is located;
 RMG companies owning a RMG factory, but not the building where the factory is located;
 Owners of a building where at least one RMG factory is located.
Other details are given in the Guideline of SREUP.
Eligible RMG companies will apply for loans to the PFIs for their eligible sub-projects
investments based on CAPs commitments (Accord, Alliance & NTPA).

--- Page 4 ---
Page | 4

08. Eligibility Criteria for PFIs

To apply to the request for proposal, participate in the project and access the loan funds,
Banks and Non-Bank Financial Institutions will be required to meet and maintain the
following eligibility criteria, based on performance and prudential parameters:

Criterion
Requirements
Legality
Duly licensed from Bangladesh Bank.
ii
Operational
Experience
Minimum 7 (Seven) years of operational experiences with
audited records
iii
Commitment to RMG
sector lending
Existence of lending policies and strategy related to the
RMG sector
iv
Capital Adequacy
(a) Minimum capital
requirement
Compliant with the minimum capital requirement for banks
and non-bank financial institution as stipulated by
Bangladesh Bank
(b) Capital Adequacy
Ratio
Compliant with the minimum risk weighted capital adequacy
ratio as stipulated by Bangladesh Bank
Profitability
Running profitably for the last 2 (two) consecutive
accounting years
vi
Non-Performing
Loans (NPLs)
Not exceeding 7% (seven percent) for the last accounting
year
vii
CAMELS rating:
Minimum “Satisfactory” CAMELS ratings
viii
Transparency
Submission and/or disclosure of annual report /financial
statements/ green banking initiatives/activities to the
respective authority and publishing/updating in the official
websites in a timely manner
ix
AML requirements
PFIs undertaking :
- to implement " Know Your Customer " procedures that
fully
comply
with
BFIU
guidelines
and
the
recommendations of the FATF
- not to finance through this Project any customers who are
on the sanction lists of Bangladesh Bank, United Nation,
European Union (EU), France, Germany and EU member
states in relation to fraud, embargoes or fight against
terrorism.
Corporate
Governance
A framework of policies, procedures and workflows that
establish effective internal control and accountability in all
phases of management operations is to be existed to control
and manage business risks and corruption.

--- Page 5 ---
Page | 5

xi
Risk Management
Core risk management guidelines and frameworks stipulated
by Bangladesh Bank are to be implemented for capacity
building of risk assessment and adoption of adequate
procedures.
xii
Green Banking
Guidelines
A green banking policy and strategy (approved by the banks/
non-bank financial institution’s Board of Directors) in line
with the ESRM guidelines issued by Bangladesh Bank is to
be formulated and adopted.

10. To participate in this fund, interested Banks and NBFIs should apply as per the
application format (annexure-1) with duly filled-up template (annexure 2, 3 & 4) attached
with this circular.

11. Interested Banks and NBFIs are requested to go through the Guideline for SREUP before
applying. Application must include all required information and relevant documents stated in
this circular, application format and the Guideline for SREUP. Incomplete applications will
not be entertained.

12. Each PFI has to sign a comprehensive Participation Agreement with Bangladesh Bank as
per the template enclosed in annexure 6 to participate in this project.

13. PFI have to submit various statements and reports for each loans and overall project as
stated by the template attached at annexure 7 with this circular as and when required by
Bangladesh Bank.

Please bring the content of this circular to the notice of all concerns.
















Attachment: As mentioned.

Yours Sincerely


(Nawshad Mustafa)
Deputy General Manager
Deputy Project Director, SREUP
Ph: 9530060

--- Page 6 ---
Page | 6

Annexure -1: Application Format
General Manager
SME & Special Programs Department
Project Director
Program to Support Safety Retrofits and Environmental Upgrades in the Bangladeshi Ready-
Made Garments (RMG) Sector Project (SREUP) (BD-2230322)
Bangladesh Bank, H.O
Dhaka-1000

Dear Sir,

Letter of Intent to become Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) under Program
to Support Safety Retrofits and Environmental Upgrades in the Bangladeshi Ready-
Made Garments (RMG) Sector Project (SREUP) (BD-2230322)

With reference to the SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019 we intend to express our
interest in participating in the project. We attach the documents as required for your kind
consideration. We also furnish the information as sought in the annexure of this circular.

We, therefore, request you to consider our application and allow us to work with you to
Support Safety Retrofits and Environmental and Social Up gradation of RMG factories in
Bangladesh through our active participation.

Thanking you


Truly yours,






CEO/MD
Bank/NBFI Name

--- Page 7 ---
Page | 7

Business Statement
Annexure -2 to Accreditation Application Form
Name of Bank/ Financial Institution:

Criterion
Statement
Fulfill the Criteria (Yes or No)
(1) Legality
Financial Institution license with BB:

(2) Operational Experiences
Establishment Year:
(Copy of audited financial statements for the latest 2 years attached)

( ≥ 7 years )

(3) Commitment to RMG sector
lending
Existence of lending policies and strategy related to the Ready Made Garments
(RMG) sector


(4) Capital Adequacy

(a) Capital in Net Worth
Taka billion (as of ):

(b) Paid-up Capital
Taka billion (as of ):

(c) Capital Adequacy Ratio
(as of ): (evaluated by BB)
( > 10 % )
(5) Profitability
Net
Profit
Taka billion(in Fiscal Year ending ):

Taka billion (in Fiscal Year ending ):

(6) Non-Performing Loans (NPL)
NPL Ratio: (as of ):

(7) CAMELS Rating
Determined rating for the Fiscal Year ending ):

(8) Prudential Regulations
“fulfilling the prudential regulations”
(Copy of risk management procedures attached)

(a) Transparency


(b) Corporate Governance


(c) Risk Management


(d) AML requirements


(e) Green Banking Guidelines


(f) Others, if any

--- Page 8 ---
Page | 8

Financial Statement
Annexure -3 to Accreditation Application Form

Name of the Bank/ Non-Bank Financial Institution:
(in billion taka)

Year 2016
Year 2017
Year 2018

Shares of Total (%) Growth (%) Shares of Total (%) Growth (%) Shares of Total (%) Growth (%)
Balance Sheet

Cash & cash equivalents






Loans(net)






Others assets






Total Assets






Deposits from customers






Due to banks & NBFIs






Other liabilities






Total liabilities






Share capital






Other reserves






Retained earnings






Total equity






Total equity & liabilities






Income Statement

Interest income






Non-interest income






Total revenue






Net interest income






Net non-interest income






Total net revenue (Operating income)






Operating expenses






Contingent risk expenses






Net non-operating income






Profit before tax






Net Profit

--- Page 9 ---
Page | 9

 Please provide reference date.

Year 2016
Year 2017
Year 2018
Shares of Total (%) Growth (%) Shares of Total (%) Growth (%) Shares of Total (%) Growth (%)
Operational ratios

Capital adequacy (>10%)






Liquidity






Single borrower exposure (<20%)






Forex exposure (<40%)






Loan to deposit ratio(LDR)






NPL






ROE






ROA

--- Page 10 ---
Page | 10

Contact Details of Relevant Personnel

Annexure -4 to Accreditation Application Form

Name of Bank/ Financial Institution:

Sl
No.
Name of the Nominated
Officials
assigned for this project
related communication
Mailing Address
Electronic Communication
Address
Line 1
Address
Line 2
City
Post Code
Cell phone no
Phone Number
Email

--- Page 11 ---
Page | 11

Annexure- 5


GUIDELINE

For

PROGRAM TO SUPPORT SAFETY RETROFITS AND
ENVIRONMENTAL UPGRADES IN THE
BANGLADESHI READY-MADE GARMENTS (RMG)
SECTOR PROJECT (SREUP)












PROJECT MANAGEMENT UNIT
SME AND SPECIAL PROGRAMMES DEPARTMENT
BANGLADESH BANK

--- Page 12 ---
Page | 12

Table of Contents
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ............................................................................................. 14
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 15
Objective ............................................................................................................................................... 15
Project Duration .................................................................................................................................... 15
Project Location .................................................................................................................................... 15
Project Component ............................................................................................................................... 16
Component 1 – Investment ............................................................................................................... 16
A. Credit Facility .......................................................................................................................... 16
B. Performance-based grant mechanism ....................................................................................... 16
Component 2 – Technical Assistance (TA): ..................................................................................... 17
1. 2B-TA: Customized services to eligible RMG companies & PFIs ............................................... 17
2. 2C TA: Technical cooperation to RMG companies and PFIs ..................................................... 18
Implementation Mechanism ................................................................................................................. 18
1. Project Management Unit (PMU) ................................................................................................. 18
2. Independent Technical Assessors ................................................................................................. 19
3. Consultant to provide customized services to PFIs and RMG factories: ...................................... 19
4. Local Service Providers ................................................................................................................ 19
Selection of PFIs ................................................................................................................................... 20
Eligibility Criteria for PFIs ............................................................................................................... 20
Process for Selection of PFIs ............................................................................................................ 20
Features of On-Lending Loans (OLL) .................................................................................................. 21
Eligibility Criteria for Participating RMG factories ............................................................................. 22
Eligibility Criteria for Sub-Projects ...................................................................................................... 23
1. Investments related to safety remediation: .................................................................................... 23
2. Investments related to environmental and social upgrade ............................................................ 24
Process for Approval and Management of Sub-Projects ...................................................................... 25
Features of Sub-Loans .......................................................................................................................... 29
The roles and responsibilities of Participating Financial Institutions (PFI) under SREUP .................. 29
The roles and responsibilities of Eligible RMG companies under SREUP: ......................................... 32
The Participating Agreements between BB and PFIs: .......................................................................... 34
The Sub-Loan Agreements between PFIs and end-borrowers: ............................................................. 34
Procurement Management .................................................................................................................... 34
Compliance with the Eligibility Requirement, Guidelines and Banking Regulations .......................... 35

--- Page 13 ---
Page | 13

Statement and Reporting ....................................................................................................................... 35
Monitoring and Evaluation ................................................................................................................... 36
Environmental and Social Risk Management Framework .................................................................... 36
Grievance Redress Mechanism ............................................................................................................. 36

--- Page 14 ---
Page | 14



ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AFD
Agence Française de Développement (or French Development Agency)
BB
Bangladesh Bank (the Central Bank of Bangladesh)
BFIU
Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit (of BB)
BGAPMEA Bangladesh Garments Accessories & Packaging Manufacturers & Exporters
Association
BGMEA
Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association
BKMEA
Bangladesh Knitwear Manufacturers and Exporters Association
BRPD
Banking Regulation and Policy Department (of BB)
CAMELS
Capital adequacy, Asset quality, Management, Earnings, Liquidity, Sensitivity
(rating system used to rate financial institutions according to those 6 factors)
CAP
Corrective Action Plan
CIPC
Customers’ Interest Protection Cell (of BB)
DEA
Detailed Engineering Assessment
DIFE
Department of Inspections of Factories and Establishments
E&S
Environmental and Social
ESRM
Environmental and Social Risk Management
ESMS
Environmental and Social Management System
EU
European Union
FATF
Financial Action Task Force
FICSD
Financial Integrity & Customer Services Department (of BB)
GFA
Grant Facility Agreement
GIZ
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (or German Technical
Cooperation, Germany)
IG
Investment Grant
ILO
International Labour Organization
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
KfW
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (or KfW Development Bank, Germany)
KYC
Know-Your-Customer
NTPA
National Tripartite Plan of Action
PD
Project Director
PFIs
Participating Financial Institutions
PMU
Project Management Unit
RCC
Remediation Coordination Cell
RFP
Request For Proposal
RMG
Ready-Made Garments
SME
Small and Medium Enterprise
SMESPD
SME and Special Programmes Department (of BB)
TA
Technical Assistance
UN
United Nations

--- Page 15 ---
Page | 15

Introduction

“Program to Support Safety Retrofits and Environmental Upgrades in the Bangladeshi RMG
Sector project (SREUP)” is initiated by the Government of Bangladesh to make the
Bangladeshi RMG sector safer (fire, electricity and building structure safety), greener
(reduction of pollution, improved resource and energy efficiency) and a decent place to work
(social compliance) through providing financial and technical support. In particular, SREUP
will aim at facilitating the access of funds for RMG factories to make investments related to
safety retrofits and environmental upgrades, providing incentive to undertake such
investments, and assisting RMG factories in implementing them. This will be financed by the
AFD, KfW, EU and BB. Technical Cooperation Partner will be GIZ.

Bangladesh Bank (BB) intends to offer credit facility and technical assistance for Bangladeshi
RMG manufacturers through PFIs to improve the safety retrofits of their factories and also to
mitigate the environmental and social risk of their activities.

The amount of the Credit Facility will be 50 Million EURO (EUR 50,000,000) and provided
to the Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) for on lending to the RMG factories. In order
to achieve the objectives, the project also aims to provide technical assistance for a total
amount of 14.29 Million EURO (EUR 14,290,000) for the PFIs and the RMG factories in
Bangladesh.
Objective

The Guideline for SREUP is intended to facilitate PFIs to understand policies and the
mechanism of the Project, to process loan to the eligible end borrowers as per the guideline.
This Guideline delineates the procedures and other relevant issues for effective
implementation of the credit facility.

Please note during the period of its implementation, it is anticipated that the conditions
underlying the Project may evolve (e.g. new regulatory or institutional arrangements may be
introduced) and/or that Project implementation frameworks may need to be adjusted to reflect
lessons learnt. This Guideline should therefore be updated from time-to-time, as necessary to
reflect the changes, which have to be adopted by PFIs.
Project Duration

The Project will be implemented over a 5-year period from 2018 to 2022.
Project Location

The Project will target safety remediation and environmental upgrade of all registered (i.e.
licensed) export-oriented RMG factories as a country-wide programme.

--- Page 16 ---
Page | 16

Project Component

The Project comprises two main components:

Component 1 – Investment
Component 2 – Technical Assistance
Component 1 – Investment
A. Credit Facility

The Credit Facility is an Apex-type line of credit, funded by a sovereign loan sanctioned by
AFD to the GoB (represented by the MoF), on-lent to BB and channeled to the PFIs through
the pre financing window of BB.

Eligible RMG companies will negotiate loans with PFIs for their eligible sub-projects
investments based on Corrective Action Plans (CAPs) commitments (Accord, Alliance &
NTPA), when existing or on investments plans to be pre-validated by a specifically
independent technical assessor (ex-ante- appointed by the Project Authority) in order to be
considered eligible to access the Credit Facility funds.
B. Performance-based grant mechanism

Investments grants will only be awarded to participating RMG factories having taken loans
for safety remediation & environmental upgrades under this project and concerned PFIs
according
to
performance-based
grant
mechanism
subject
to
the
positive
recommendation/report from Ex-post assessor appointed by the Project Authority.

The principle is that, Grants will be disbursed to the benefit of the Eligible Factory and of the
loan-issuing PFI upon successful completion of the eligible sub-project investments, as a
reward for the undertaken works and achievement of compliance with safety and/or
environmental/social standards.

The verified achievement of the sub-project will result in the reduction of the principal
amount of the loan by the following amount:
 10% of the total loan amount related to safety remediation investments
 20% of the total loan amount related to environmental and/or social investments.

The breakdown of investment grants among Eligible RMG Companies and PFIs would be
90:10. That means, 90% of Investment Grant will be awarded to Eligible Companies and
PFIs will receive an amount equivalent of 10% of the Investment Grant to stimulate their
participation in the Project subject to completion the project successfully.
An assessment will be conducted by an independent technical assessor (ex-post assessment)
to validate the actual safety and environmental impact of the investment with the

--- Page 17 ---
Page | 17

performance indicators. If the assessment draws positive results, PMU will review and then
the performance grant will be disbursed if satisfactory.
Borrowers have to apply for investment grant in time and not more than 6 months of
investment completion period according to their investment plan after loan issuance.
The investment grant will be awarded to the Eligible Factory only as a deduction from the
loan account. No fund will be transferred directly to the factory; instead, the corresponding
amount will be deducted from their outstanding loan amount. Upon request by the PFI to the
PMU, fund will be transferred to PFI account and PFI will make adjustment by crediting 90%
of the grant amount directly to the loan account of the eligible factory.
If any RMG factory is unable to complete the sub-project investment as per the validated plan
or is unable to complete the task as per this Guideline or failure to achieve planned objectives
and commitments, no Grant will be awarded to that factory.
Component 2 – Technical Assistance (TA):
The Project intends to support PFIs and RMG companies with the objective to facilitate the
investment process. The Main areas of support (Customized Services/Trainings to PFIs,
factories and LSPs) will include support measures for factories and PFIs.
A technical cooperation will be provided to RMG companies and Participating Financial
Institutions (PFI) to facilitate access to finance and secure compliance with adequate
environmental and social standards under SREUP. Participating financial institutions (PFI)
and RMG factories will get customized technical assistance and cooperation (2B TA & 2C
TA) from this project.

For RMG companies the Consultants will support and facilitate investments for safety,
environmental and social upgrades. This will include services along the whole investment
cycle (i.e. ranging from planning to implementation of investments). For PFIs the Consultants
will provide support to develop and implement an adequate Environmental and Social Risk
Management System for them in line with ESRM Guideline of BB.
Technical Assistance activities are foreseen on these levels:

1. 2B-TA: Customized services to eligible RMG companies & PFIs

This Subcomponent of Technical Assistance (TA) is defined as 2B TA.
The activities of this sub-component (2B TA) will focus on supporting the RMG factories in
designing and implementing their investment plan, as well as the commercial banks
participating in the Project in their activities regarding financial management of sub-loans,
environmental and social risk management, etc. Customized services to PFIs and RMG
factories will provide:

--- Page 18 ---
Page | 18

A. Consultancy to support PFIs by further developing their ESMS activities
The objective of this consultancy is to provide support to PFIs to develop, implement and
maintain an adequate Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) for better
assessing, mitigating, documenting and monitoring impacts and risks associated with their
financing activities in line with ESRM Guideline of BB.

B. Consultancy to support and facilitate the investment cycle

The objective of this consultancy is to support and facilitate the investment cycle for safety;
E&S upgrade investments of RMG companies. They support RMG companies to prepare
their sub-projects investment plans, help them to be comply with safety and E&S standards
and laws, to mitigate E&S impact of business activities, etc.

2. 2C TA: Technical cooperation to RMG companies and PFIs

This Subcomponent of Technical Assistance (TA) is defined as 2C TA.

The objective of this 3-year programme implemented by GIZ is to strengthen capacities to
finance and implement finance safety remediation, environmental and energy efficiency
investments in the RMG sector. The program will use a multi-level approach:
 On the micro level, it will support financial institutions, owners, management and
technical experts of RMG companies, and local service providers (LSPs);
 On the interim level, it will collaborate with the RMG sector associations (e.g. BGMEA
and BKMEA) and training institutions (e.g. BBTA, BIBM, BUET);
 On the macro level, it will directly involve, cooperate with and support BB; the DIFE
could also be another macro-level partner on the RMG side.
The project has 3 main areas of intervention, with participants from the banking sector,
stakeholders of the RMG sector and respective LSPs, which are:
A. Enhance the financial sector’s capacity to address funding needs of safety
remediation and environmental upgrades of RMG factories.

B. Increase the knowledge of RMG managers in the areas of safety remediation and
environmental upgrades as well as on available financial options.

C. Increase and strengthen the supply of services by LSPs, particularly with regard to
cost- benefit analysis and investment planning.
Implementation Mechanism

1. Project Management Unit (PMU)

BB will implement this Project through a Project Management Unit (PMU) established
within the SME & Special Programmes Department of the Bangladesh Bank. This PMU will
be responsible for overseeing and management of the credit and coordinate with all

--- Page 19 ---
Page | 19

concerned entities to ensure the effective implementation the project and also reviewing the
circular & guideline under SREUP.
2. Independent Technical Assessors

Independent Technical Assessors means a consulting firm having expertise and experience in
safety and/or E&S assessment, which will be appointed by the project authority to conduct
ex-ante and ex-post assessments according to an international competitive bidding process.
They will guarantee the independency of the assessment before eligible RMG factories to
access the Project funds (loan and grants).

Their roles will be to:
 Validate the investment plans of eligible RMG factories before they access sub-loans
from PFIs through the Project (ex-ante assessment);
Note: Ex-ante assessments relating to safety remediation sub-projects investments
strictly following the CAPs and/or Detailed Engineering Assessments (DEAs) of the
Accord, the Alliance or the NTPA might not require on-site verification unless deemed
appropriate by the Independent Technical Assessor. For sub-projects investments relating
to E&S upgrade, or relating to safety remediation but not strictly following the CAPs
and/or DEAs of the Accord, the Alliance or the NTPA, ex-ante assessments will require
spot verification.
 Verify and validate satisfactory completion of the sub-projects investments financed
through the Project funds as per the approved investments plans, before award of the
performance-based investment grants (ex-post assessment);
Note: Spot verification is mandatory for all ex-post assessments, except when the RMG
factory can evidence full CAP completion certificate from the Accord or the Alliance
fully relating the concerned sub-project investment;
 Liaise with PMU only and to ensure timely performance of ex-ante and ex-post
assessments before sub-loans to be sanctioned and upon completion of sub-projects
investments, respectively;
3. Consultant to provide customized services to PFIs and RMG factories:
Project will provide customized technical assistance and cooperation to participating
financial institutions (PFI) and RMG factories. The technical assistance will be directly
provided by the consultants appointed by the project authority for providing the support of
2B TA as mentioned above.
4. Local Service Providers
Local Service Providers (LSPs) are local consultant firms having expertise and experience in
safety remediation and/or E&S upgrade in the RMG sector, which will receive specific train
the trainer courses (under 2C TA) to deliver in their turn services to voluntary stakeholders of
the banking and RMG sectors (with a focus on PFIs and RMG companies accessing the
Project funds, as a first target group) in the framework of this Project.

--- Page 20 ---
Page | 20

Figure: Implementation Outline

The overall implementation can be summarized through the figure above, which focuses on
arrangements and relationships among project components. It is also to be emphasized that
the Technical Cooperation measures by GIZ does not limit to the PFIs and participating RMG
companies, but target the banking and RMG sectors as a whole as mentioned above.
Selection of PFIs
Eligibility Criteria for PFIs

To apply to the request for proposal launched by BB, participate in the Project and access the
Project funds, financial institutions will be required to meet and maintain the eligibility
criteria as set forth in the SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019
Process for Selection of PFIs
BB will have the responsibility of selecting PFIs through a request for proposal (RFP) to be
organized as follows:
o At first, the PMU will call an open request for financial institutions to submit their
participatory application based on the fulfilment of all eligibility criteria;
o Upon receipt of applications and letters of intent from financial institutions to participate
in the Project, the PMU will verify whether the eligibility criteria are fulfilled and declare
the financial institutions that are eligible to the Project;

--- Page 21 ---
Page | 21

o Participation Agreements will be signed between BB and each of the selected PFIs. PFIs
will then be entitled to start sending applications for sub-projects financing.

Annual review or as and when necessary of eligibility criteria will be made to ensure
continuation of participation status (PFIs will be required to provide updated information to
the PMU, which will perform the review on this basis).
Features of On-Lending Loans (OLL)

PFIs will be entitled to ask BB to pre-financing their portfolios of sub-loans upon approval of
sub-projects by the PMU as set forth in the SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019. As a
general principle, pre financing loans from BB to PFIs will be back-to-back with sub-loans
from PFIs to eligible RMG factories. The features are:

 Maturity (i.e. tenor) and grace period of pre-financing loans will match with those of
the respective sub-loans;
 Frequency of interest and principal installments under pre-financing loans will be
synchronized with that of the respective sub-loans.
 Under the pre-financing scheme, PFIs makes disbursements to eligible RMG
companies after receiving the corresponding funds from BB.
 Disbursement to the end-borrower will be specified by PFIs depending on the types of
sub-loan and will be disbursed within 1 to 3 tranches usually or it can be disbursed as
per clients need.

The on-lending rate of BB to PFIs follows the applicable rates for the Special Programmes
implemented by BB. Interest rate to be paid by PFIs to BB under this Project is fixed at 3.5%
per annum.
Interest and principal payments under each pre-financing loan shall be made in accordance
with the repayment schedule of such loan, as prepared by the PFI and approved by the PMU.
No overdue of interest and principal payment is expected.

Exceptionally, a PFI may request BB, through prior notice sent sufficiently in advance, to
make delay in debiting the PFI’s current account maintained with BB on the basis of valid
ground like liquidity problem; cash reserve ratio (CRR) and statutory liquidity ratio (SLR)
requirements etc.

On-lending Loan facilities will be made available to the PFI on “first come first served” basis
and subject to the availability of balance in the Project Operating Account and the Revolving
Fund Account within the Project period. Bangladesh Bank shall reserve the right to meet the
request for On-lending Loans of the PFIs in part or in full as considered appropriate by BB
out of the available fund.

In case the PFI is found to have received On-lending Loan under the scheme on the basis of
such statement and information which may subsequently be proved false or incorrect, BB
shall have the right to impose penal interest. In case of any overdue amount, PFIs will have

--- Page 22 ---
Page | 22

to pay a penalty of 2% of the sub Project on-lending for a maximum of 3 working days then a
penalty at bank rate above the Project on-lending rate for subsequent days on due amount. In
case of any false information, excess charge at the rate of the bank rate over the loan will be
applied as a penalty on the loan amount. In such cases, BB will recover the entire outstanding
loans with due interest plus applicable penal interest by way of debiting the current account
of the concerned PFI maintained with BB. In case of loan prepayment, PFIs should not
impose any charges/frees to the end borrower for the early settlement or prepayment, as well
as BB will not impose any penalty to PFIs for this.
Eligibility Criteria for Participating RMG factories

The following entities are eligible to access the project funds for their eligible sub-projects:
1) RMG companies owning both a RMG factory and the building where the factory is
located;
2) RMG companies owning a RMG factory, but not the building where the factory is
located;
3) Owners of a building where at least one RMG factory is located

Provided:

a) The RMG factory is registered as an export-oriented factory, as evidenced by the holding
of a BGMEA, BKMEA or BGAPMEA membership, or is covered by any of 3 initiatives for
safety remediation in the RMG sector (Accord, Alliance, NTPA);
b) The RMG company is at least 3-year old with audited financial records;
c) The RMG factory provides evidence of compliance with national tax regulation, and
environmental certification from DoE;
d) The RMG company is creditworthy with respect to the proposed sub-project;
e) The RMG company undertakes to implement its sub-project in accordance with the agreed
and validated investment plan (according to the agreed timeline, specifications and quality,
and any mitigating measures and/or conditions set in such investment plan);
f) The RMG company does not receive any other concessional financing for the
implementation of this sub-project;
g) As an additional requirement in the case #2 above, there is a long-term lease agreement in
place between the building owner and the RMG company (written and signed lease
agreement with min. 5 years left), in order to ensure the bankability of the sub-project as well
as the commitment of the RMG company to stay in the long term in the retrofitted /upgrades
premises once the sub-project has been completed.
h) In case of multi-rented buildings, the eligibility of building owners will be appreciated
based on the registration of a sufficient number of tenants as export-oriented factories along
with the existence of a sufficient number of long-term lease agreements between those RMG
companies and the building owner.

--- Page 23 ---
Page | 23

i) The RMG Company will be eligible for their voluntary investments (equity portion at least
10%) related to safety, environment and/or social upgrade to be financed under the Project
funds.
Eligibility Criteria for Sub-Projects
1. Investments related to safety remediation:

Eligible RMG companies will be eligible to access the Projects funds for the following
safety-related investments:
1. All investments related to the implementation of the CAPs and/or the DEAs as
validated by any of the three initiatives for safety remediation (Accord, Alliance,
NTPA);
Note: for their sub-projects to be eligible, eligible RMG companies shall undertake
under the Project funds all remaining investments recommended by the CAP and/or
DEA and needed to reach compliance with the initiative (and not only a part of
them).
2. For factories covered by the NTPA that do not have any CAP/DEA in place, all
investments related to fire safety (e.g. fire-fighting system with alarms, smoke
detectors, extinguishers, fire-proof doors, sprinklers, etc.) electrical safety (sound
electrical system) and structural safety (stable and robust building structures):
Aiming at reaching a level a compliance equivalent to those of the Common
Standards (agreed by the Accord, the Alliance and the NTPA); and
Designed as per investments plans validated by the Independent Technical
Assessors in order to reach the level of compliance mentioned above.
All eligible investments will have to be reviewed and validated by the Independent
Technical Assessors, being said that ex-ante assessments relating to investments in the
case #1 above might not require on-site verification (unless deemed appropriate by the
Independent Technical Assessor). At contrary, on-site verification for investments in the
case #2 above will be mandatory in the course of ex-ante assessments.
As a general principle, the Project targets at first sub-projects relating with building
retrofitting. Project funds shall be used only for the above-mentioned eligible
investments: in particular, costs related to demolition or land acquisition / lot servicing
shall not be financed under the Project.

As a general principle, Project funds shall not be used for financing sub-projects already
completed or on-going at the time of signing of the Participation Agreement among BB
and the concerned PFI (the “PFI participation date”). Only sub-projects whose
implementation has not started before the PFI participation date shall be financed under
the Projects funds.

--- Page 24 ---
Page | 24

2. Investments related to environmental and social upgrade

Only the eligible RMG factories which:
Have already completed their safety remediation and can evidence full compliance
to the CAP (with positive review by the Independent Technical Assessor); or
Which simultaneously undertake to conduct their safety-related investments under
the sub project
A single RMG factory can benefit from Project funds for both safety- and E&S-related
investments provided it fulfils one of the two above-mentioned conditions.

Eligible RMG companies will be eligible to access the Projects funds for the following
E&S-related investments:
1. All investments aiming at improving energy efficiency through the use of new green
equipments and technologies, in particular those reducing energy consumption while
providing productivity gains.
They include but are not limited to the following:
Process optimization enabling reduction of energy consumption through the
replacement or upgrading of energy-intensive equipment (e.g. boilers,
generators, compressors, water pumps, etc.);
Improved heat and steam management: installation of waste heat recovery units,
steam condensate recovery, on-site cogeneration / regeneration, etc.;
Small decentralized renewable energy power generation (e.g: biomass, biogas);
Efficient lighting and ventilation systems, energy management systems.
This category of investments shall satisfy the following quantitative criteria:
For energy efficiency :
“a reduction of energy consumption of at least 20 % compared to the situation
before investment
An internal rate of return of investment in energy efficiency of a least 10 %.”
b. For wastewater recovery / effluent treatment / chemicals recovery : “a reduction of at
least 50 % in the total load of the target pollutant of priority to the factory, as well as
regulatory compliance with respect to that pollutant”
For solid waste management solutions : “move from non-compliant to compliant
with regulations”

2. All investments aiming at improving the environmental footprint of the factory (i.e.
contributing to improve the local or global environment and/or to reduce its
degradation) through the use of environmental-friendly technologies, in particular

--- Page 25 ---
Page | 25

those reducing the consumption of natural resources and/or the generation of
pollution.
They include but are not limited to the following:
Wastewater recovery and treatment facilities (e.g.: effluent treatment plant);
Safe disposal and recycling of chemicals and hazardous waste (e.g. caustic soda
recovery);
Waste management solutions: proper management of solid waste (e.g.
decontamination and safe disposal of sludge), waste sorting, etc.
This category of investments shall satisfy the following qualitative criteria:
Reduction in the consumption of natural resources;
Reduction in the generation of all types of pollution (wastewater, chemical);
Decontamination, improved waste management;

3. All investments aiming at improving the workplace environment and conditions.
They include but are not limited to the following:
Upgrading of existing aeration /ventilation, Installation of air-conditioning;
Improvement of toilets and fresh rooms;
Construction of canteen/cafeteria, childcare facility, etc
This category of investments shall satisfy the following qualitative criteria:
Prior consultation with employees and/or labour unions’ representatives and
evidence that their requests / expectations have been considered (priority, etc.);
Objective: a majority of employees consider their workplace environment and
conditions have been improved after the investment.
Sub-projects can be a combination of the above-mentioned eligible investments.
All eligible investments plans will have to be reviewed and validated by the Independent
Technical Assessors through ex-ante assessments requiring on-site verification.

As a general principle, Project funds shall not be used for financing sub-projects already
completed / on-going at the time of signing of the Participation Agreement among BB
and the concerned PFI (the “PFI participation date”). Only sub-projects whose
implementation has not started before the PFI participation date shall be pre-financed
under the Projects funds.
Process for Approval and Management of Sub-Projects
The approval and management of sub-projects will follow the following steps:

--- Page 26 ---
Page | 26

1. Upon request from RMG companies or spontaneously, PFIs identify among their clients
potential beneficiaries and make a first assessment of their financing needs and
creditworthiness with regards to the proposed investment projects, as well as a first
screening of the companies’ and proposed investments projects’ eligibility to access the
Project funds, including a preliminary assessment of their E&S performance in terms of
compliance with national regulation.
2. Following the verification of the Project eligibility criteria and the pursuit of the loan
appraisal as per its standard procedure, a PFI takes in-principle decision to provide
financing to an eligible RMG company for the implementation of its eligible sub-project.
3. The PFI sends the application for sub-project approval to the PMU (addressing it to the
Project Director along with all relevant documents for approval), which verifies that all
Project eligibility criteria are met and proper safeguard procedures are followed.
If necessary, the PMU can take help of the Sustainable Finance Department of BB to
ensure that the E&S compliance checks have been done by the PFI in accordance with
the ESRM Guidelines.
4. At this stage (“primary approval” = confirmation of eligibility), the PFI suggests the
eligible RMG company to utilize the assistance of the Sub-Component 2B TA to support
the preparation of its investment plan. If needed, the PFI requests the PMU to arrange the
support by appointing the technical assistant to the RMG factory.
The PFIs also indicates to the eligible RMG factory any complementary safety,
environmental or social, engineering or other assessment, study or design that is required
to be carried out prior to loan approval.
5. Upon receipt of the investment plan along with any other required documents, the PFI
finalizes its review and loan appraisal procedure, and if positive, gets credit approval to
sanction a loan to the eligible RMG company for implementing its eligible sub-project
(after obtaining satisfactory CIB report from BB and ensuring compliance to any other
bank’s norms and conditions);
6. After receiving the investment plan of the eligible RMG Company along with positive
recommendation and notification of credit approval from the PFI, the PMU requests the
Technical Assessor to perform the ex-ante assessment of the eligible sub-project.
7. After getting clearance from the Independent Technical Assessor, the PMU approves the
sub-project and notifies the PFI, which notifies the eligible RMG Company.
8. The PFI negotiates and signs the sub-loan agreement with the eligible RMG company
based on the Project requirement set out in features of Sub-Loans (Clause 05, SMESPD
Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019);
9. The PFI disburses the funds to the RMG company as per the sub-loan agreement and
according to this Guideline for SREUP;
10. The PFI maintains disbursement records and accounts of the sub-loan as well as
supporting documents and bank account statements relating to disbursements, and send

--- Page 27 ---
Page | 27

copies to the PMU. It also ensures the recovery of interest and principal installments as
per the sub-loan repayment schedule.
11. Once the sub-project has been completed, the RMG Company informs the PFI, which
prepares and submits to the PMU an application for approval of investment grant award.
12. The PMU reviews the application then requests the Independent Technical Assessor to
perform the ex-post assessment of sub-project completion.
13. After receiving confirmation from the Independent Technical Assessor that the sub-
project has been satisfactorily implemented and completed, the PMU approves the award
of the investment grant and notifies the PFI, which notifies the RMG Company.
14. The current account hold by the PFI at BB and the loan account hold by the RMG
company at the PFI are adjusted accordingly, the amount of the investment grant
awarded to the RMG company being deducted from the outstanding loan amount.
15. The Investment Grant (IG) will be distributed among the RMG Companies & PFIs as per
the ratio 90:10.

--- Page 28 ---
Page | 28

Figure: Work Flow Diagram and Decision Matrix



























PFI and RMG
LA sign (4 wks)
Start works-(4
wks)
Completion 3-5
yrs)
PFI- 4 wks
PMU- 5 wks
(1+3+1)
(10)
Technical Assessor to
validate work completion
PMU receives request for IG along with
completion report from the PFI
(11)
PMU transfer IG to PFI
(12)
The Investment Grant (IG) will be distributed among the
RMG Companies & PFIs as per the ratio 90:10.
PMU- 8
weeks
(1+4+3)
Technical Assessor to
validate investment plan
YES
NO
Send back
to PFI
PMU receive the loan application
with appraisal from the PFI
BB disbursement
Sanction letter to PFIs
Factory receives
the loan from PFIS
Factory starts sub-
project
implementation
Factory requests for
Investment Grant (IG)
to PFI after completion
Prepare the investment plan by RMG factories
and
Submit it to PFIs with Loan application form appropriately
PFI- 4
weeks
LSP
Not creditworthy
Creditworthy
Appraisal of Loan application by PFIs
Eligible for IG
Non-eligible for IG

--- Page 29 ---
Page | 29

Features of Sub-Loans

To ensure the Project is market-driven, all terms and conditions of sub-loans will be decided
by PFIs based on their appraisal of sub-projects and end-borrowers’ creditworthiness as well
as their standard banking practice, credit procedures and commercial conditions. However,
sub-loans will have to meet the conditions as set forth in SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated
31/03/2019.
All other terms and conditions (including gearing ratio debt/equity, collateral requirement,
grace period, installment frequency and repayment schedule, etc.) will be decided by PFIs,
who will ultimately bear the credit risk on the end-borrowers.

As a general principle, sub-loans will be sanctioned on the basis of market terms, without
creating market distortion. PFIs will determine loan interest rates to sub-borrowers based on
their cost of funds, operating costs plus a reasonable risk-adjusted spread and profit margin.
Pricing will be determined according to market principles, be competitive with market rates
but applicable interest rate could not exceed 7% per annum. No excessive fees (i.e. beyond
usual bank and market practice) shall be applied by PFIs to end-borrowers under the Project.
The roles and responsibilities of Participating Financial Institutions (PFI)
under SREUP
The PFIs will be a limited number of local commercial banks selected by BB through a
request for proposal (RFP) procedure to serve as disbursing units of the Project funds to the
RMG sector. The responsibility of PFIs is to ensure the proper management of the Project
funds for financing sub-project investments.
The roles of PFIs will be to:
Receive programme funds from BB;
Determine creditworthiness of potential eligible sub-projects for their clients;
Negotiate loans and disburse funds to support the eligible sub-projects of their
clients that are creditworthy;
Liaise with the Independent Technical Assessors through PMU to ensure timely
performance of ex-ante and ex-post assessments before sub-loans to be sanctioned
and upon completion of sub-projects investments, respectively,
Process applications to the PMU for approval of investment grants upon completion
of sub-projects investments;
Manage loan principle and interest repayments;
Prepare financial management reports, including both management of programme
funds and repayment of loans;

--- Page 30 ---
Page | 30

Liaise with the PMU to ensure timely communication of financial management and
environmental reports concerning the financing of sub-projects investments;
Cooperate with the PMU appropriate procedures for management of Project funds;
With the support of the PMU, develop a communication strategy with respect to the
Project;
Participate to the Sub-Components 2B and 2C TA activities dedicated to the
strengthening of the banks’ environmental and social risk management (ESRM);
Consolidate the application of market-based instruments in financing investments
related to safety remediation and E&S upgrade under the Project, including the
development of a pipeline of potential eligible sub-projects in coordination and
with the assistance of the Component 2B TA.

Even if Sub-Component 2C TA program is expected to benefit first to PFIs, it will not be
restricted to PFIs only: all banks and financial institutions in Bangladesh will be encouraged
to participate and attend the sub-component activities (e.g. training sessions).
PFIs will make their own organizational arrangements for participating in the Project, or will
manage the Project sub-loans through their existing arrangements.

The general duties of PFIs will be to:
o Communicate the availability, purpose and lending terms of Project funds to RMG
companies who may wish to access the Project funds;
o ensure the timely disbursement of the Project funds to RMG companies that
participate in the Project;
o Ensure timely repayment of Project funds from RMG companies that take out sub-
loans under the Project;
o Maintain close coordination with the PMU to ensure the timely transmission of
financial, creditworthiness and other data in accordance with the Project requirements;
o Coordinate with BB and other relevant parties as necessary to ensure the efficient and
effective use and management of the Project funds.

Specifically, PFIs will undertake the following:
o Market Project funds to RMG companies;
o Prepare creditworthiness and eligibility checks on all RMG companies that present a
potential eligible sub-project to be financed under the Project;
o Maintain filing systems(electronic and or paper) that include all relevant documents,
invoices, records of loans and loan repayments and other information for all RMG
companies whom they entitle access to Project funds;

--- Page 31 ---
Page | 31

o Following confirmation of the RMG company creditworthiness and analysis of the
sub-project eligibility, request the PMU to review the application and:

 Recommend whether the sub-project meets eligibility criteria for financing based
on the documentation available;
 Identify safety, environmental or social, engineering or other assessments, studies
or designs that are required from the applicant prior to loan approval;
o Following notification from the PMU of sub-projects approval, proceed with
extending loans to the concerned RMG companies according to the Project terms and
conditions;
o Process debits from the sub project account in accordance with relevant documents;
o Adhere to the Project conditions and on-lending agreements with BB, including
minimum duration of loans and /reduction of 10 / 20 percent of principal
(respectively) upon verified satisfactory completion of the sub-projects investments;
o Liaise with the PMU to share information to confirm that goods and services financed
under Project funds are in compliance with the investment plans validated by the
Independent Technical Assessors (including specifications, quantities, etc.),
o Capture sufficient details of all transactions to allow their proper presentation in
financial reports;
o Prepare, contribute to and review quarterly and annual project financial and
monitoring reports (FMRs), audit reports, sub-projects completion reports and other
Project reports as required by the PMU,
o Provide financial project data to the PMU in accordance with schedules agreed with
the PMU to ensure that the reporting deadlines of the Project are achieved;
o Participate to the Sub-Components 2B TA activities dedicated to the strengthening of
the banks’ environmental and social risk management (ESRM) and collaborate with
the Technical Assistant, as required, and participate to training sessions organized by
the Sub-Component 2C TA dedicated to banks.

In order to ensure compliance with the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) in the field of anti-money laundering and combating terrorist financing, PFIs will
carry out “Know-Your-Customer” procedures that fully comply with Bangladeshi law and the
recommendations of the FATF. This will entail notably the identification of all client
beneficiaries and effective client beneficiaries of the Project. All relevant information
regarding these entities and persons shall be made available in the application forms. Such
information shall be communicated to the Contributors upon their request. The Project
reporting and auditing activities will document the respect of this obligation.
PFIs undertake not to establish business relationships under the Project with customers who
are included on the sanction lists and exclusion lists of BB, United Nations, the European

--- Page 32 ---
Page | 32

Union, France, Germany and EU member states in relation to fraud, embargoes or the fight
against terrorism.
The updated lists and further reference are available on the Internet under the following
addresses:
 United Nations: http://www.un.org/Docs/sc/committees/1267/1267ListEng.htm
 European Union: http://ec.europa.eu/comm/external_relations/cfsp/sanctions/list/consol-
list.htm
 France : http://www.tresor.economie.gouv.fr/4248_Dispositif-National-de-Gel-Terroriste
 Germany: http://www.ausfuhrkontrolle.info/ausfuhrkontrolle//de/ebargos/index.html

Moreover, in order to promote sustainable development, PFIs will ensure compliance with
internationally recognised environmental and labour standards, including the fundamental
conventions of the ILO and international environmental treaties.
To that effect, PFIs undertake to:
 Carry out their business in compliance with such international E&S standards in a
manner consistent with the laws and regulations applicable in Bangladesh;
 Require the client beneficiaries to comply with such laws, regulations and standards in
the operation of their businesses;
 Elaborate and implement the environmental and social liability policies; including the
Environmental and Social Action Plans developed;
 Deliver to the PMU, on each anniversary date of the PFIs Agreement, an annual
progress report regarding the implementation actions of its environmental and social
liability policies together with next steps schedule.
 While the ESRM is pre-requisite for banks to participate in the Project, which PFIs not
having adequate ESRM in place will commit on developing, implementing and
maintaining such ESMS within a reasonable timeframe (18 months) with the support
of Consultant 2BTA.
The roles and responsibilities of Eligible RMG companies under SREUP:
RMG companies that use Project funds must prepare and implement their safety remediation
and/or environmental & Social (E&S) up gradation sub-projects investments in accordance
with the objectives and the eligibility criteria of the Project and comply with regulatory
requirements.
Their main roles will be to:
Define and prepare descriptions of potential sub-projects for Project financing;
Submit sufficient information to a PFI to determine the creditworthiness and
eligibility of the sub-projects as per the Project’s eligibility criteria;

--- Page 33 ---
Page | 33

With the Component 2B TA dedicated to RMG companies, prepare a feasible
investment plan and submit it to the PFI for its review and validation;
Facilitate the ex-ante assessment (including on-site verification, if any) by the
Independent Technical Assessor;
Satisfy credit conditions of the PFI for the loan to be sanctioned (including equity
contribution required to co-finance the sub-project investment, if any);
Use the Project funds as per the approved investment plan;
Facilitate inspection by the PFI and BB
Provide reports to the PFI on the implementation of the sub-project investment
plan, including self-monitoring progress reports and annual reports until full
satisfactory completion;
Make sure the investment plan is implemented in a timely manner and inform the
PFI of any difficulties in the implementation of the sub-project investment plan;
Inform the PFIs upon completion of the sub-project investment and facilitate the
ex-post assessment (including the spot verification) by the Independent Technical
Assessor for the performance-based investment grant to be awarded;
Ensure compliance with regulatory requirements;
Repay loans and associated interest according to established schedules.

RMG companies that access the Project funds will benefit from attractive financing to meet
safety remediation and/or E&S upgrade objectives and meet regulatory and/or voluntary
compliance requirements. In addition, they may benefit from technical assistance, positive
public recognition of their actions and (depending on the sub-project they implement) reduced
consumption of water, energy and/or other resources, and/or improved process efficiency.
In order to achieve these benefits, participating RMG companies will be required to:
o Provide sufficient technical and financial data to the concerned PFIs regarding their
proposed sub-project to permit a creditworthiness and eligibility check of the company
with respect to the sub-project;
o Undertake feasibility, detailed design and/or any other studies and prepare the
necessary engineering and other designs to determine the feasibility of the proposed
sub-project in accordance with the Project criteria and provide these to the PFI for
evaluation;
o Work with the PFI (or the Sub-Component 2B TA dedicated to RMG factories) as
necessary to ensure that their proposed sub-projects will fulfil the Project criteria and
achieve the Project objectives;
o Agree with the PFI on an investment plan that has been previously validated by the
Independent Technical Assessor;

--- Page 34 ---
Page | 34

o Implement their sub-projects in accordance with the agreed and validated investment
plan (according to the agreed timeline, specifications and quality, and any mitigating
measures and/or conditions set in such investment plan);
o Undertake procurement of works, goods and services in accordance with applicable
standard market practice;
o Use the Project funds as per the approved investment plan;
o Operate and maintain the investments funded under the Project in accordance with
good practice, manufacturer recommendations and equipment/parts replacement
requirements in order to ensure that they achieve and maintain the Project objectives;
o Undertake self-monitoring in accordance with agreements with the PFI sufficient to
demonstrate the results of the investments funded under the Project;
o Cooperate in good faith with any type of inspection assigned by PMU
o Provide data and information to the PFI regarding the implementation and operation of
the sub-projects investments funded under the Project;
o Make all financial records related to their sub-projects available, upon request, to the
PFI and auditors of the Project;
o Facilitate verification monitoring by the PFI and/or by BB of sub-project
achievements as far as the Project performance indicators are concerned, if need be
through access to the sub-project site;
o Undertake not to establish business relationships for investment funded under the
Project with suppliers who are included on the sanction lists of BB, United Nations,
the European Union, France, Germany and EU member states in relation to fraud,
embargoes or the fight against terrorism.
The Participating Agreements between BB and PFIs:

After selecting for the credit facility, PMU will give the approval letter to the selected Bank
and Financial Institutions. Separate Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will be signed
between the Bangladesh Bank and the selected PFIs named “Participating Agreement”. Once
Participation Agreement was signed, the bank will start sending the applications for financing.
The Sub-Loan Agreements between PFIs and end-borrowers:

For each subproject, a sub-loan agreement shall be signed between the PFI and the concerned
end-borrower to stipulates the applicable terms and conditions of the sub-loan as per standard
practice of the PFI.
Procurement Management

--- Page 35 ---
Page | 35

Procurement of Goods, Services and Works financed under the facility will be carried out by
the end borrowers following well established commercial best practices.


Eligible Expenditures:
The Project will finance the procurement of works and goods (including equipment)
necessary to achieve agreed safety remediation and E&S upgrades objectives in creditworthy
RMG companies. Within limitations identified below, procurement contracts may also
include:
 Works which are integral to the implementation requirements of the safety
remediation and E&S upgrades equipment;
 Equipment, inspection, supervision and commissioning costs where these are integral
to the implementation requirements of the equipment.

Not eligible for financing under the Project are the general administration expenses,
compensation, purchase of land and real property, salaries/wages, customs, taxes and duties,
and items not directly related to the investment project.
Compliance with the Eligibility Requirement, Guidelines and Banking
Regulations

The eligibility criteria and terms and conditions of sub-loan have been established in prior
sections of this Guidelines and the SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019. The PFI
examines the Application and other documents submitted to check whether it complies with
the qualifying conditions established by the Project. The PFIs and the End-borrowers are
guided to abide by this Guideline for handling the project. In conducting the credit appraisal
and approval of the Application, the PFI ensures that each loan is examined in compliance
with the prevailing banking rules and regulations imposed by Bangladesh Bank. The
procedures of the PFI established for appraising the normal credits are also be adopted for the
purpose of the compliance with the Banking Regulations.
In addition, the PFI has to comply time to time with the all as well as latest Prudential
Regulations by BB for all of their loans under this project.
Statement and Reporting

PFIs should prepare specific report for the use of funds under the Project and will be
responsible for providing data on the sub-loans and investment grants disbursed from the
Project funds.

--- Page 36 ---
Page | 36

PFI shall submit various statement and reports for each loans and overall project as stated by
the annexure 7 of SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019. PFI also have to follow
specific format and instruction for that reporting and statement given by PMU in time to time.

Monitoring and Evaluation

The PMU will monitor the outcomes from the utilization of fund under the facility
periodically through the reports submitted by the PFIs. In addition to the off-site supervision,
the PMU jointly with other relevant departments of BB will conduct surprise onsite inspection
of the PFIs and the end-borrower to ensure the effective end-use of the fund.
Environmental and Social Risk Management Framework

The Guidelines on Environmental and Social Risk Management (ESRM) which have been
developed by the Sustainable Finance Department of BB with the support of IFC and issued
in February 2017 and whose implementation is mandatory for all banks and financial
institutions (FIs) in Bangladesh from January 2018 will also applicable for this Project.
These ESRM Guidelines will be the master framework for the banks and FIs in assessing
E&S risks in their credit/investment proposals/accounts, managing E&S risks in their
credit/investment portfolio and establishing Environmental and Social Management System
(ESMS) within their organization. This Guideline outline the detailed procedures for banks
and FIs to identify, mitigate and monitor the potential environmental and social risks
pertaining to the projects they finance.
PFIs under the Project must comply with the Environmental and Social Risk Management
Framework, hence with the ESRM Guidelines. In particular, they will be responsible for
regular supervision and monitoring of the implementation of any environmental and social
management plan (ESMP) or mitigation measures under the sub-projects they finance.
They will have to submit reports to BB on the implementation of such plans by the end-
borrowers accordingly to the agreement with PFIs.
In case any updated versions or amendments to the ESRM Guidelines are issued by BB, they
will come as automatically applicable to PFIs under the implementation of this Project.
Grievance Redress Mechanism

In order to resolve the grievances related to the Project, BB will establish a dedicated
Grievance Redress Mechanism to address the complaints regarding any issue, concern,
problem, or claim (perceived or actual) that may arise out. The objective of this grievance
redress system is to reduce risks related to the Project and to ensure an opportunity for
expressing concerns.

--- Page 37 ---
Page | 37

In the first instance, all complaints have to be submitted to the Project Director (PD) of this
Project. All grievances must be in writing (with an assigned number so as to enable tracking
of complaints). Verbal and telephonic complaints and letters from fictitious names and
address will not be considered. Complaints from individuals or parties who are not directly
related with the Project (including its bidding processes) will not be recognized. The Project
Management Unit (PMU) will deal with the complaints to adequately address the issue. The
designated focal person of the PMU will coordinate the grievance redressing system.
The Project Director will consider the subject matter of the complaint and decide whether to
reject the complaint or to take any corrective action. In case of rejection, the PD will
communicate in writing with the concerned complainant stating reasons for the rejection of
the complaint. In case of accepting the complaints, the PD will assign specific official(s) or
team to resolve the issue and propose a response to the complaints. The PD will communicate
the proposed response back to the complainant clarifying the corrective action (if any).
In addition, if one is not pleased with the judgment of PD/PMU then he/she may lodge his/her
complain to the Customers’ Interest Protection Cell (CIPC), a well-known Grievance
Redressal Unit in the Financial Integrity & Customer Services Department (FICSD) of BB.
CIPC of FICSD receives complains through Complaint Submission Form (available in the
website of BB), letters, fax, e-mail and a dedicated Hot-Line number (16236).
If local communities or directly affected stakeholders approach a PFI with reasonable and
responsible claims that an activity funded by a sub-loan under the Project has caused harm to
them, their livelihoods, or environment, the PFI will work with the end-borrower to try to
address the concerns in a reasonable and responsible manner. The PFI will report such
complaints to the PMU as soon as possible. In addition, the PFIs shall inform the aggrieved
party(ies) that, if the efforts by the end-borrower to resolve the issue are unsatisfactory, it/they
have the right to bring their complaint(s) to the PMU.

--- Page 38 ---
Page | 38

Annexure 6: Participation Agreement

Participation Agreement between Bangladesh Bank and PFIs

This Agreement is signed on the day of XXXX
BETWEEN
The Bangladesh Bank established by the Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 127 of
1972), having its Head Office at Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka (hereinafter called BB),
And
b) duly established under Companies Act of 1994 and carrying on its business
under BB’s license No. XX dated XXX having its head office, at XXXXX,
Dhaka [(hereinafter called the Participating Financial Institution (PFI)].

Preamble
Whereas:
(A) AGENCE FRANÇAISE DE DEVELOPPEMENT (AFD) has provided a loan fund
of Euro 50.00 million to Government of Bangladesh (GOB) under Program to
Support Safety Retrofits and Environmental Upgrades in The Bangladeshi Ready-
Made Garments (RMG) Sector Project (SREUP) (Project No: BD-2230322 ) (Loan
No. CBD 1012 01 R) to upgrade Bangladesh’s RMG factories to international safety
standards, to improve work conditions in these factories, and to assist with managing
the environmental impact linked to this activity (hereinafter called the “Sub-
Project”) introduced by BB through its SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019
to provide On-lending Loans to banks and financial institutions.
(B) Bangladesh Bank has been entrusted with the responsibility to administer the PFIs
under SREUP on behalf of GOB under the Subsidiary Loan Agreement (SLA)
dated October 3, 2018 and any further amendments thereafter;
(C) Through the issued Circular, interested banks and non-bank financial institutions
(PFIs) are requested to enter into a participation agreement with BB to avail of the
On-lending Loan facilities out of AFD fund; and
(D) Whereas the PFI fulfills the eligibility criteria as set forth in clause 08 of SMESPD
Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019 and is willing to avail the On-lending Loan
facility from the above mentioned fund on terms and conditions described in the
said Circular.
Now, therefore, the parties hereto hereby agree as follows:

--- Page 39 ---
Page | 39

Article – I
Definition:
Section 1
Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms used in the preamble to this
Agreement have the respective meaning therein set forth and the following additional
terms have the following meaning:
“Bank” means any banking company operating in Bangladesh having license from
Bangladesh Bank.
“SMESPD” means SME and Special Programs Department of Bangladesh Bank.
“PMU” means a unit established at SMESPD of BB to specifically handle all
relevant tasks related to the PFIs under SREUP.
“Financial Institution” means any non-bank financial institution engaged in
financing and leasing business having license from Bangladesh Bank.
“PFI” means a Participating Financial Institution; either bank or non-bank
financial institution.
“On-lending Loan” means the loan granted by Bangladesh Bank to banks or non-
bank financial institutions under SREUP.
“RMG” means Ready Made Garments.
“End-borrower” means an enterprise satisfying the criteria described in Article IV
of this Agreement for receiving a Sub-loan from a PFI.
“Sub-loan” means a loan provided by the PFI to an end borrower as described in
section 13 of this Agreement
“Sub-project” means an investment project of an end-borrowerr to be finance by a
Sub-loan.

--- Page 40 ---
Page | 40

Article – II
Objectives and Target End-borrower:
Section 2
The PFI declares its commitments to the objectives to be achieved through
SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019 to this end, carries out its building safety
lending program with due diligence and efficient & appropriate administrative, financial
and banking practices.
Section 3
(1) BB shall provide On-lending Loan against the loans made or to be made by the PFI
to an end-borrower mentioned below to upgrade Bangladesh’s RMG factories to
international safety standards, to improve work conditions in these factories, and to
assist with managing the environmental impact linked to these activities.
(2) The PFI will be required to submit Demand Promissory Note amounting equal to
the disbursement each time it receives pre-financing under this Agreement.
Demand Promissory (DP) Note to be submitted to ensure repayment (principal as
well as interest) against sanctioned amount. That DP Note will be treated as current
security to BB on the following grounds:

a. Total receivable amount at present or later on; and
b. All expenses, charges and costs (if any) that is repayable as per law
enacted by BB.

Article – III
Terms and Conditions for the On-lending Loans to the PFIs
Section 4
(1) The On-lending Loan will be available only for loans having following features:
The maximum loan amount: BDT-equivalent of EUR 1 million, to be
extended to EUR 3 million in the cases of (ii) major environmental upgrade
or (iii) any other duly justified and documented case;
Maturity: 3 to 5 years, to be extended to 7 years in the cases of (ii) major
environmental upgrade or (iii) any other duly justified and documented case;
A factory may avail both the facilities provided they are eligible for
investments; at first safety and then environmental and social up gradation
Factories who have already completed their safety remediation and can
show the evidence of full compliance to the CAP (with positive review by

--- Page 41 ---
Page | 41

the Independent Technical Assessor); or which simultaneously undertake to
conduct their safety-related investments under the project will be eligible for
their voluntary investments related to environment and/or social upgrade to
be financed under the Project funds.
The repayment of the loan will start after a certain grace period and to be
repaid on quarterly installments as per nature of loan. The grace period will
be determined by the PFIs based on the projected timing of the cash inflows
of individual projects as per their usual standard banking practice.
Fees: as per standard practice of the PFI; applicable fees will have to be
disclosed to BB in the sub-project application and duly justified if not
aligned with the usual bank and market practice. No excessive fees (i.e.
beyond usual bank and market practice) shall be applied by PFIs to end-
borrowers under the sub-project.
The due installments will be recovered from the PFIs current account
maintained with Bangladesh Bank as per the repayment schedule. Necessary
initiatives will be taken to recover the loans by the Participating Financial
Institutions at field level. There will be no relationship between the
recoveries of disbursed amount by the Participating Financial Institutions
with repayment to BB.
The PFIs will require providing a debit authority to Bangladesh Bank for
realizing the due installments at the time of the signing this agreement.
Letter of Authority will be handed over to the Participating Financial
Institutions to maintain the General A/c with BB for debiting the repayment
of installments of the pre-finance facility.
(2) The loan extended by BB to the PFIs shall be repaid by the PFI in accordance with
fixed repayment schedule. PFIs will be entitled to ask BB to pre-financing their
portfolios of sub-loans upon approval of sub-projects by the PMU and signature of
sub-loan agreements with eligible End borrowers.
As a general principle, pre-financing loans from BB to PFIs will be back-to-back
with sub-loans from PFIs to eligible end borrowers:
a) Maturity (i.e. tenor) and grace period of pre-financing loans will match with
those of the respective sub-loans;
b) Frequency of interest and principal installments under pre-financing loans will
be synchronized with that of the respective sub-loans.
c) Under the pre-financing scheme, PFIs makes disbursements to eligible RMG
companies after receiving the corresponding funds from BB.

--- Page 42 ---
Page | 42

d) Disbursement to the end-borrower will be specified by PFIs depending on the
types of sub-loan and will be disbursed within 1 to 3 tranches usually or it can
be disbursed as per clients need.
e) Interest and principal payments under each pre-financing loan shall be made
in accordance with the repayment schedule of such loan, as prepared by the
PFI and approved by the Project management Unit (PMU) of BB. No overdue
of interest and principal payment is expected.

Section 5
BB shall charge interest on the loan extended to the PFIs at 3.50% per annum.
The PFI shall apply the interest rate maximum of 7% per annum on the Sub-loans made
to the End-borrowers.
Section 6
On-lending Loan facilities will be made available to the PFI on “first come first
served” basis and subject to the availability of balance in the Project Operating Account
and the Revolving Fund Account within the Project period. Bangladesh Bank shall
reserve the right to meet the request for On-lending Loans of the PFIs in part or in full as
considered appropriate by BB out of the available fund.
Section 7
BB shall have the discretion to refuse any request for On-lending Loan made by the
PFIs if such request in BB’s consideration does not conform to the objectives, terms and
conditions of the On-lending Loan scheme set forth in its SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated
31/03/2019.
Section 8
In case the PFI is found to have received On-lending Loan under the scheme on the
basis of such statement and information which may subsequently be proved false or incorrect,
BB shall have the right to impose penal interest. In case of any overdue amount, PFIs will
have to pay a penalty of 2% of the sub Project on-lending for a maximum of 3 working days
then a penalty at bank rate above the Project on-lending rate for subsequent days on due
amount. In case of any false information, excess charge at the rate of the bank rate over the
loan will be applied as a penalty on the loan amount. In such cases, BB will recover the entire
outstanding loans with due interest plus applicable penal interest by way of debiting the
current account of the concerned PFI maintained with BB. In case of loan prepayment, PFIs
should not impose any charges/frees to the end borrower for the early settlement or
prepayment, as well as BB will not impose any penalty to PFIs for this.

--- Page 43 ---
Page | 43

Section 9
(1) In case a PFI fails to repay any installment of loans as per the repayment schedule,
BB may realize the installment amount plus applicable interests by debiting them
against the current account of the concerned PFI maintained with BB.
(2) In case a PFI fails to perform any of its obligations under this Participating
Agreement, BB shall have the right to suspend or terminate the right of the PFI to
use the proceeds of the Credit Facility made available to it to make Eligible Loans
or declare it due and payable.
Section 10
The PFI shall be duly established and operating under the laws of the Country and
shall:
Maintain a sound financial structure, and the organization, management, staff and
other resources required for the efficient carrying out of its activities;
b) Conduct its operation and affairs including interest rate policies in accordance
with sound financial principles and practices:
Maintain a lending and investment policy conducive to the growth and
development of RMG sector and maintain suitable procedures and adequate
number of suitably qualified staff to enable it effectively to:
(i) Appraise the financial, technical, environmental and economic feasibility of
Sub-projects and to make Sub-loans to End-borrowers in accordance with
sound lending and investment policy and in keeping with the principles, terms
and conditions set forth in SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019;
(ii) Supervise and monitor the proper use of the Sub-loans by End-borrowers; and
Section 11

The PFI shall:

carry out “Know-your-Customer” procedures that fully comply with
Bangladeshi law and the recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) standards on money laundering and terrorism financing, including the
Financial Sanctions List issued by the United Nations, the European Union,
Germany and France;
(ii)
issue a certificate of compliance with the laws against money laundering and
the financing of terrorism in the form provided in Schedule 1 below;

--- Page 44 ---
Page | 44

(iii)
carry out activities under the Project in accordance with appropriate technical,
economical, financial, managerial, environmental and social standards and
practices, including in conformity with: (A) the investment and lending
policies and procedures referred to the SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated
31/03/2019; (B) the ESRM standards as set forth by the ESRM Guideline of
Bangladesh Bank.
(iv)
make one or more Eligible Loan(s) to one or more Eligible Companie(s) and
signed Eligible Loans Agreements on the terms and conditions set forth in
SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019;
exercise its rights in relation to each such Eligible Loan in such manner as to
protect its interests and the interests of the GoB, the BB and AFD, comply with
its obligations under its respective Participating Agreement, and achieve the
purposes of the Project;
(vi)
not assign, amend, abrogate or waive any of its agreements providing for an
Eligible Loan, or any provision thereof, without the prior consent of BB;
(vii)
supervise, monitor and report on the activities to be carried out under an
Eligible Investment by each Eligible Company in accordance with the
provisions of the SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019
(viii) furnish all such information to BB, as may be reasonably requested with regard
to the progress of the activities under the Project, the performance of its
obligations under its respective Participating Agreement, and other matters
relating to the purposes of the Project;
(ix)
PFIs should prepare specific reports for the use of funds under the Project and
will be responsible for providing data on the sub-loans and investment grants
disbursed from the Project funds. PFIs should submit to BB all the reports as
set forth in the SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019
Promptly inform the BB of any condition which interferes or threatens to
interfere with the progress of its activities under its respective Participating
Agreement.
Article – IV
Terms and conditions of the Sub-Loans (Eligible Loans to End borrowers)
Section 12
The PFI shall make Sub-loans to the End-borrowers on terms by written contract or
by other appropriate legal means to obtain rights adequate to protect the interests of BB,
GOB and AFD, and comply with the obligations under the Participating Agreement in
order to achieve the purpose of the sub-project including the right to:
inspect by BB itself or jointly with representatives of the EDPs (European
Development Partners), such constructions, goods and sites, works,

--- Page 45 ---
Page | 45

equipment included in the investment Sub-project of the End-borrowers, the
operation thereof, and any relevant records and documents;
obtain all such information as BB shall request relating to the forgoing and
to the administration, operation and financial conditions of the End-
borrower and to the benefit to be derived from the concerned Sub-project,
including but not limited to the evidence of use of the proceeds of the Sub-
loan, financial statements for every accounting term;
suspend or terminate the right of the End-borrower to the use of the proceeds
of the Sub-loan upon failure by such End-borrower to perform its
obligations under its contract with the PFI; and
cause to comply with all the environmental regulations established by
ESRM Guidelines for environmental and social consideration;

Section 13

Sub-loan under the sub-project shall be used by End-borrowers exclusively for the
purpose of the Sub-project, as set forth in the SMESPD Circular no. 01 dated 31/03/2019.
Conditions for Eligible End-borrowers:
a) RMG companies owning both a RMG factory and the building where the
factory is located;
b) RMG companies owning a RMG factory, but not the building where the factory
is located;
c) Owners of a building where at least one RMG factory is located.
d) The RMG factory is registered as an export-oriented factory, as evidenced by
the holding of a BGMEA, BKMEA or BGAPMEA membership, or is covered
by any of the three initiatives (ACCORD, ALLIANCE and NTPA) for safety
remediation in the RMG sector
e) The RMG company is at least 3-year old with audited financial records;
f) The RMG factory provides evidence of compliance with national tax
regulation, and environmental certification from DoE

Section 14

The PFI shall require Eligible Companies to:

Carry out the Eligible Investment financed out of the proceeds of an Eligible
Loan with due diligence and efficiency and in accordance with sound
technical, economical, financial, managerial, environmental and social
standards and practices, including those set forth in the SMESPD Circular no.
01 dated 31/03/2019;

--- Page 46 ---
Page | 46

(ii)
Maintain the documents about the investment and provide information any
time
(iii) Accept that the PFI may inspect, by itself or jointly with BB and representatives
of AFD, if the AFD shall so request, such goods and the sites, works, plants and
construction included in the activities to be financed out of the proceeds of an
Eligible Loan, the operation thereof, and any relevant records and documents;
and
(iii)
Provide all such information as the BB shall reasonably request relating to the
foregoing and to the administration, operations and financial condition of the
Eligible Company and to the benefits to be derived from the activities financed
out of the proceeds of a Sub-loan

In addition, the PFI shall require that, the goods, works and services to be financed out
of the proceeds of the Eligible Loan shall be procured in accordance with standard
procurement practices prevailing in the market.

Article – V
Miscellaneous
Section 15
i) This Agreement shall come into force and effect on the date of its signing by the

two parties.
ii) This Agreement shall stay in force until BB notifies the PFI the termination of
granting On-lending Loan facilities. This notification shall be made in writing at least
three months before it becomes effective.

Section 16
Any provision of the Agreement can be amended if necessary on mutual agreement
of the contracting parties.

--- Page 47 ---
Page | 47




Witness:








For and on behalf of
BANGLADESH BANK



(Authorized Representative)

For and on behalf of

(PFI Name)



(Authorized Representative)

--- Page 48 ---
Page | 48

SCHEDULE 1 - Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism Financing Certificate
[on the Participating Financing Institution’s letterhead]
I, the undersigned [Surname, Name], Compliance Director / Inspection Director / Internal
Audit Director of [name of the Participating Financing Institution], certify that:
- the procedure entitled [name of the procedure], dated [date] is the operational internal
procedure of [name of the Participating Financing Institution] with respects to anti-money
laundering and anti-terrorism financing requirements;
- this procedure, currently applicable within [name of the Participating Financing Institution],
extends to all the activities of our institution and complies with the forty (40) recommendations
of the FATF;
- [name of the Participating Financing Institution] systematically takes into account in its
systems, the updated financial and commercial sanctions lists adopted by the United Nations,
the European Union and France, and controls its clients and operations in accordance with such
lists.
- [name of the Borrower] is subject to control by a national supervising authority ([name of the
authority]) and has not been subject to any investigation by the latter raising deficiencies
within its anti-money laundering and anti-terrorism financing prevention procedures.
- [name of the Participating Financing Institution] trains each year [number] staff to handle
anti-money laundering and anti-terrorism financing matters.
- [name of the Participating Financing Institution] has, within the past year
 suspended [number] operations on suspicions of money laundering and terrorism
financing,
 refused [number] operations on suspicions of money laundering and terrorism
financing,
 filed [number] suspicious transaction reports with the financial intelligence unit of
[pays];
- the internal audit / inspectorate of [name of the Participating Financing Institution] regularly
controls the implementation by the bank’s staff of its anti-money laundering and anti-terrorism
financing operational procedure.
Signed at [lieu], on [date]

--- Page 49 ---
Form No. A: SUB-PROJECT SUMMARY REPORT
Name
Representative (person & number)
Women Entrepreneur (Yes or No)
Purpose (safety/ Environmet/ Social)
Specification of purpose
Location
Date of Sub-Loan Agreement
(dd/mm/yy)
PFI's Sub-Loan Amount (Tk.)
End-borrower's Own Funds (Tk.)
Total Sub-project Cost (Tk.)
PMU's OLL Amount (Tk.)
Financing Ratio of OLL to Sub-project
Cost (%)
Other source, if any
Interest Rate for end borrower (% Per
Annum)
Maturity (months)
Total No. of Installment
Grace Period, If any (month)
Installment no.
Latest Disbursed Date of Sub-loan
(dd/mm/yy)
Amount Disbursed during the Period
(Tk.)
Cum. Amount Disbursed (Tk.)
Latest Repayment Date (dd/mm/yy)
Amount Repaid during the Period (Tk.)
Cum. Amount Repaid (Tk.)
Balance of Sub-loan at the End of the
Period (Tk)
Collateral (Land / Movable, etc)
Category (A/B/C)
Negative Impact, if any
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
Total
Page | 49
Investment
Finance
PFI Sub-Loan
Social &
Environment
Note *1: Enter all the Sub-loans approved since the beginning of the Project including those that have been fully repaid in sequential order. The data for
disbursement, repayment and the balance should be updated as of the end of the period covered by the Report.
On-going Sub-Project Summary Report
(Period Covered: From DD/MM/YYYY To DD/MM/YYYY)
SL. No.
SREUP_PMU's OLL No.
PFI's Sub-Loan No.
Name of PFI
Branch
End-
Borrower
Program to Support Safety Retrofits and Environmental Upgrades in the Bangladeshi Ready-Made Garments (RMG) Sector Project (SREUP) (BD-2230322)
Annexure 7

--- Page 50 ---
Total
Page | 50
(continued from the above).
(Name & Title)
Outst'ding Balance of OLL at the End of the
Period (Tk)
Outst'ding Balance of Arrear at the End of the
Period (Tk)
Repayment Date
Cum. Total Amount Repaid (Tk)
Repayment amount (TK)
Date:
Name of PFI:
(Guide for preparation)
1.Data to be collected from PFIs through Form A, "PFI Report on On-going Sub-project Summary". Please make sure that
PFIs report all of the Sub-loans approved since the beggining of the Project including those that have been fully repaid.
2. List up all of the Sub-projects reported by PFIs into the Table.
3. Enter the PMU's OLL Number to each of the Sub-projects reported by PFIs, if such numbers were not quoted in the report
from PFIs.
4. Calculate and enter the "Total" wherever required.
5. The contents of PFIs' reporting should be same with what have been described in their Application for OLL.
Name of PFI
PFI's Sub-Loan No.
SREUP_PMU's OLL No.
SL. No.
Cumulative Disbursed Amount under OLL
(Tk)
Disbursed amount under OLL (TK)
On-lending Loan (OLL)
Name of End- borrower
Branch
Disbursement Date