--- Page 1 ---
website: www.bangladesh-bank.org
www.bangladeshbank.org.bd
Department of Off-site Supervision
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

DOS Circular Letter No. 07




Date: 15 July, 2010


Chief Executives/Managing Director
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,

Mainstreaming Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) in banks in Bangladesh
For the purpose of monitoring CSR adoption and CSR performance of banks in terms
of BB guidance issued in June 2008, banks are required to submit certain information
regarding CSR initiatives.
You are, therefore, requested to submit a half-yearly statement on CSR as per enclosed
format. The statement should reach Bangladesh Bank within 30 days of each half-year end.
Accordingly, first statement as of 30 June, 2010 is to be submitted within July 31, 2010.
Please acknowledge receipt.
Enclosure: As stated.



Yours sincerely,

Sd/-
(Sultan Ahmed)
General Manager
Phone: 7120376

--- Page 2 ---
Statement on Corporate Social Responsibility Initiatives
Name of Bank:





For the Period…….
A. Organization:
1. Please provide a short description of the initiatives of institutionalizing corporate governance
framework for the purpose of safeguarding the interests of shareholders and adding value to
customers, shareholders, partners and employees, alike.
2. Provide a short description on the initiatives towards providing a modern, healthy and safe
workplace and on the development and improvement of employee’s competencies and skills,
creating a learning and development environment.
3. Provide a short description of the actions taken to reduce the bank’s adverse impact on
environment as a result of its operation and business activity.

B. Market Environment:
1. Provide a short description of the engagement with borrowers in scrutiny of the environmental
and social impacts of their proposed undertakings and disseminating valuable environmental
know-how to customers, associates and suppliers, as well.

C. Financial inclusion:
Description of initiatives

Amount of
Investment
(Taka in crore)
No. of
beneficiaries
i. Self-employment credit and SME lending programs,
taken up solo or in association with locally active Micro
Finance Institutions (MFIs), designed to create
productive new on-farm /off-farm employment.


ii. Financing programs for installation of biomass
processing plants, solar panels in rural households, for
waste recycling plants in locations populated by urban
poor and for Effluent Treatment Plants (ETPs) in
manufacturing establishments.


iii. Mobile phone based/ local MFI outlet supported
programs promptly delivering remittances from migrant
workers to recipients in remote rural households;
programs for card based/ mobile phone based delivery of
financial services to such households;


iv. Financing programs supporting folk crafts, folk musical
and performing arts, aimed at promoting domestic
tourism and markets in cultural products/events besides
income and employment for the population groups
involved.



Contd/pg-2

--- Page 3 ---
D. Social projects:
Description of initiatives

Amount of
Expenditure
(Taka in crore)
No. of
beneficiaries
Direct social interventions conducted by the bank, both as
occasional/remedial measures or sustainable/continuous
projects.


i. Education


ii. Health


iii. Disaster Management


iv. Environment


v. Sports


vi. Art & Culture


vii. Others



E. Community investment:
Description of initiatives

Amount of
Expenditure
(Taka in crore)
No. of
beneficiaries
Supplementing initiatives of Civil Society
Organizations (CSOs), NGOs and institutions involved in
social and environmental improvement including:


i. Education


ii. Health


iii. Disaster Management


iv. Environment


v. Sports


vi. Art & Culture


vii. Others




Authorized Signature
Name, Designation