--- Page 1 ---
Statistics Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head office, Dhaka
Website : www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

Std. Circular No-01/2012

Dated: 14/08/2012

Managing Director/CEO
All schedule banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Subject: Submission of returns on Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Bangladesh to

Bangladesh bank's Enterprise Data Warehouse through Web portal from


January-June, 2012 on half-yearly basis.


According to FE circular No. 21 dated November 03, 2009, Authorized Dealer branches
(AD branches)/ Offshore Banking Units (OBUs) have been submitting the FDI related
information of their FDI client enterprises in the prescribed form (filled up by respective
enterprises) to Statistics Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office on half-yearly basis. At
present to accomplish Enterprise Data Warehouse(EDW) project established in Bangladesh
Bank, all scheduled bank and Non Bank Depository Corporation are directed to insert and submit
all previously reported monthly, quarterly, half yearly and annual basis information in prescribed
RIT through web portal taking January 2012 as base according to circular (Std circular no-1,
dated December 22, 2011). Subsequently, all AD branches/OBUs have to collect FDI
information from their FDI client enterprises in prescribed form (filled up properly by respective
enterprises) and submit to Bangladesh Bank's EDW from now through web portal by inserting
the information in prescribed RITs. All FDI enterprises and AD branches/OBUs have to follow
the related following instructions from onwards:
1. All AD branches/OBUs have to collect FDI related information from their FDI client on
half-yearly basis (January-June and July-December) which are properly filled up by
respective client enterprises in prescribed form (form FI-1) and upload the information
through following mentioned FDI related Rationalized Input Templates (RIT) in
Bangladesh Bank EDW from onwards.
Type of
Information
Reporting
Form
Related RIT
Reporting
Frequency
Submission Deadline
Foreign
Direct
Investment
(FDI)
FORM FI-1
(Revised)
1. T_ME_S_INV_FOR
2. T_ME_S_INV_NON_RES
3. T_ME_S_INV_OP_PRFT
Half-yearly
Within 3 months from
the end of half year i.e.
January-June Report by 30
September and July-December
Report by 31 March of the
next year.

--- Page 2 ---
2. All AD branches/OBUs have to submit the collected forms and other supporting
documents of FDI enterprises mentioning list of enterprises to Statistics Department,
Bangladesh Bank, Head Office with letter in due time after successful uploading of FDI
related RITs to Bangladesh Bank’s EDW.

3. FDI client enterprises have to submit the form FI-1 through one bank branch (nominated
by the enterprise) though it is a client of one or more branches of one or more banks. In
such case, FDI client enterprises should inform the banks (client enterprise of banks)
except nominated bank branch about the nominated bank branch in written and submit
one copy of the same to Statistics Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office.

4. FDI client enterprises have to submit a copy of audited yearly/half yearly(which is
applicable) balance sheet and income statement along with half yearly FDI return to their
concerned AD branches/OBUs . Unaudited balance sheet & income statement must have
to submit if audited balance sheet & income statement are not available during the
reporting period. In the case of any significant changes which might take place later in
audited accounts must be brought to the notice of this department in order to revise the
existing data base accordingly.

5. FDI enterprises, which will submit their FDI returns for the first time must have to submit
attested copy of the incorporation certificate, MOA, registration by concerned authority,
Schedule–X, Form-XII(which is applicable) to their nominated AD branches/OBUs.

6. The following documents have to submit by FDI enterprises during the reporting period :
a) Documents of remittances related to investment or debt received by FDI enterprises
from abroad
b) Documents of remittances sent by FDI enterprises to abroad
c) Documents of import of Machinery and Equipment imported by FDI enterprises.

7. AD branches/OBUs have to submit branch wise updated list of FDI enterprises (Name
and type of enterprise, address of registered office including phone number) to Statistics
Department of Bangladesh Bank regularly within one month after every half year
(January-June and July-December) and have to collect updated Reference File to include
FDI related information in related RITs.

8. FDI enterprises (A & B type) located in EPZ areas have to submit regularly FDI returns
through their nominated banks on half yearly basis.

9. FDI enterprises either located in EPZ or non-EPZ have to collect the certificate from
Statistics Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office through their nominated banks
mentioning properly and duly submission of the aforesaid returns and submit a copy of
the same to their concerned banks.

--- Page 3 ---
10. The AD branches/OBUs have to ensure the certificate received by FDI enterprises from
Statistics Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office as an acknowledgement of
properly and duly submission of the returns before extending any financial
assistance/services.

11. As per above mentioned instructions, the AD branches/OBUs have to submit the related
returns and start to upload the RITs from January-June 2012 on half yearly basis until
further notification.

12. The concerned bank officials will have to train up, if necessary, for correct reporting on
FDI related information through RITs.

According to the above mentioned instructions, all AD branches/OBUs are advised to
play a responsible role to insert FDI related information in RITs and upload these to Bangladesh
Bank EDW through Web Portal by collecting FDI related information from their FDI enterprises.


Kindly acknowledge the receipts and bring the contents of this circular to the notice of all
concerned.
Yours faithfully
sd/-
(Md. Mizanur Rahman)
Phone: 9530213