--- Page 1 ---
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Motijheel, Dhaka-1000
Bangladesh
www.bb.org.bd


Debt Management Department





DMD Circular No. -01

Date: 22 January 2014

Chief Executive
All scheduled bank companies and financial institutions working in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,
Investment in government securities by individuals

Individuals have recently shown keen interest for investment in government securities (Treasury
Bills and Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds). But it has been informed that individuals do not get
adequate information and necessary cooperation from their banks though there are specific instructions in
paragraph 2(i) and 2(ii) under the heading of “Issuance of Bangladesh Government Treasury Bonds” in
Government of Bangladesh’s gazette notification dated 24 June 2007 and subsequent amendments
thereto:
2(i) Individuals and institutions resident in Bangladesh such as banks, non bank financial
institutions, insurance companies, bodies corporate, authorities responsible for the management
of provident funds, pension funds etc shall be eligible to purchase the Bangladesh Government
Treasury Bonds (BGTBs).
2(ii) Individuals and Institutions not resident in Bangladesh shall also be eligible to purchase the
BGTBs, with coupon payments and resale/redemption proceeds transferable abroad in foreign
exchange, provided that:
(a) The purchase is made with funds from a non-resident foreign currency account with a
bank in Bangladesh in the name of purchaser;
(b) The BGTB purchased by a non-resident may freely be resold to a resident in Bangladesh
or to another non-resident. Resale to a non resident shall be subject to the provision of
paragraph 2(ii)(a).

02. Scheduled banks and financial institutions maintaining accounts with Motijheel Office of
Bangladesh Bank may open Business Partner ID(BP ID) in favour of their individual/institutional
customers in Market Infrastructure (MI) Module of Bangladesh Bank to participate in auctions of
Treasury Bills and BGTBs. Individuals may also buy or sell government securities in secondary market
over the counter/Trader Work Station (TWS) of MI module. Some of the Primary Dealer banks are using
this system quite efficiently. Accordingly, other banks and financial institutions are also advised to be
active in facilitating their individual customers for buying/selling of government securities and provide
required information and necessary cooperation promptly.

Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Bishnu Pada Saha)
General Manager
Phone: 9530131
E-mail: bishnu.saha@bb.org.bd