--- Page 1 ---
Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka

BRPD Circular No.- 04


23 February, 2014
Date: ----------------------
11 Falgun, 1420


Chairman, Board of Directors/CEO
All Schedule Banks in Bangladesh.

Dear Sir,
Transactions with Bank-Related Persons.
To ensure proper utilization of bank’s fund and to acquire and maintain confidence
of the depositors, transactions with bank-related persons need to be conducted in a
transparent manner in accordance with explicit policies. A number of provisions relating
to such transactions are incorporated in Section 17, 18, 26Ga, 27 & 28 of the Bank
Company Ain, 1991 (updated upto 2013). In addition, banks are advised to abide by the
following instructions while transacting with bank related persons:
Definition:
(i) ‘Bank-related Persons’ means the person as described in the explanation part of
Section 26Ga of the Bank Company Ain, 1991.
(ii) ‘Financial Transactions’ means making loans & advances, issuing letter of credit,
providing guarantee & other financial benefits and commitments; buying-selling of
goods, services & immovable properties; leasing or renting of immovable
properties.
(iii)‘Significant Shareholder’ means any person, organisation or company that owns,
directly or indirectly, alone or in concert with another person, more than five
percent of owners’ equity of any company.
General Regulations for Transactions with Bank-Related Persons:
(i) No bank-company shall enter into a transaction with or for the benefit of a bank-
related person, if such transaction would be entered into on less favourable terms
and conditions to the bank-company than would be agreed if the counterparty were
not related to the bank-company.
(ii) All financial transactions conducted by a bank-company with or for the benefit of a
bank-related person are subject to the prior approval of the majority of the Board
of Directors of the bank-company.

--- Page 2 ---
(iii)No bank-company shall have an aggregate amount outstanding on all funded
exposure to, or for the benefit of, bank related persons in excess of 10% of the
bank’s Tier-1 capital. For the funded facilities which are backed by cash or en-
cashable securities, actual exposure will be determined by deducting such
collaterals.
Additional Regulations for Bank Directors:
3.1
General regulations for Director’ loans:
Following directives are to be complied with in addition to relevant provisions of
the Bank Company Ain, 1991 when providing loans & advances and other financial
facilities to bank directors, their relatives & their affiliated entities:
a) Loan limit:
(i) Total amount of loan & advances, guarantees and other credit facilities provided to
a bank director, his/her sole proprietorship firms, his/her partnership firms, any
private or public company where he/she is acting as a director should not exceed
50% of the face value of shares of that bank-company held in director’s own name.
In case of public company’s exposure, a director’s exposure will be proportionate
to his/her shareholding in that company.
(ii) If the total amount of loan & advances, guarantee and other credit facilities
provided to a director or his/her such affiliates exceeds 50% of the face value of
shares of the bank-company held in director’s name, it should be immediately
placed before the board of directors and Bangladesh Bank. The excess amount
should be repaid within the time determined by BB. Under no circumstances,
renewal or extension of time of loan & advances, guarantee & other financial
facilities in excess of that 50% can be made.
b) Loan approval:
(i) Any loan & advances, guarantee and other credit facilities provided to a bank
director, his/her sole proprietorship firms, his/her partnership firms, any private or
public company where he/she is acting as a director, any person or entity for whom
he/she stands as a guarantor, and to his/her spouse, father, mother, son, daughter,
brother, sister and dependents should be approved by the majority member of the
board of directors.
(ii) All loan & advances, guarantees and other financial transactions conducted by a
bank-company with bank-directors, their aforesaid relatives, dependents and
affiliated entities must be approved in the Annual General Meeting and separately
disclosed in the audited financial statements of the bank-company.
c) Conditions of Loan:
(i) Personal guarantee of the director concerned should be obtained when extending
any loan & advances to a bank director, his/her sole proprietorship firms, his/her
partnership firms, any private company where he/she is acting as a director, and to

--- Page 3 ---
his/her spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister and dependents.
Mortgages against such loan & advances should be registered in favour of the
bank-company.
(ii) No loan/investment facilities wherein the borrower is exempted fully or partially
from bearing the loss, including Mudaraba or Musharaka systems of
loan/investment, can be provided to any bank director or his/her such relatives and
his/her affiliated entities.
d) Prior approval of Bangladesh Bank:
(i) Prior approval of Bangladesh Bank will be required for providing funded facilities
amounting taka 5.00 million or above, and composite facilities comprising funded
& non-funded facilities amounting taka 10.00 million or above to a bank director,
his/her sole proprietorship firms, his/her partnership firms, any private or public
company where he/she is acting as a director, and to his/her spouse, father, mother,
son, daughter, brother, sister and dependents. Banks should apply for prior
approval from BB using the attached form duly signed by the Managing Director
enclosing related minutes of the Board meeting and attested copy of the loan
proposal.
(ii) In case of any alteration/cancellation/return of collateral, securities, personal
guarantee, etc. provided against loan & advances and guarantee; or, in case of any
alteration of any condition of loans & advances, guarantee and any other credit
facilities of a director/ex-director, his/her such relatives & dependents and
affiliated entities, prior approval from Bangladesh Bank will have to be taken. In
this regard, a copy of the sanction letter (enumerating the terms and condition)
should be attached with the application.
e) Waiver of Loan/interest:
(i) Waiver of any loan or part of loan and interest thereof that has been transferred to
income account of the bank-company cannot be allowed to a director/ex-director,
his/her sole proprietorship firms, his/her partnership firms, private or public
company where he/she is acting as a director, any person or entity for whom he/she
stands as a guarantor, and his/her spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother,
sister and dependents.
(ii) Prior approval of Bangladesh Bank will be required in case of waiving accrued
interest or part thereof arising from loans to director/ex-director, his/her aforesaid
relatives, dependents and affiliated entities. But, in case of ex-directors who are at
present not holding any share of the bank-company, and if such loans were availed
before or after their directorship in the bank-company, waiver of interest can be
granted by the Board of Directors without prior approval of Bangladesh Bank.
3.2
Regulations for Independent Directors:
Neither loan facilities can be provided to, nor other financial transactions can be
conducted with an independent director engaged in the bank-company, his/her sole

--- Page 4 ---
proprietorship firms, his/her partnership firms, private or public company where he/she is
acting as a director or holds more than 5% share of equity, any person or entity for whom
he/she stands as a guarantor, and his/her spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother,
sister and dependents.
3.3
Regulations for Representative Directors:
In addition to General instruction for Director’ loans mentioned in section 3.1 of
this circular, following instructions are to be complied with for loans to a director who
represents institutional shareholder of the bank-company:
(i) Approval and guarantee of the board of the shareholder institution/
organization/trust should be obtained for providing any loan and advances or any
kind of financial facilities to a representative director, his/her relatives &
dependants, and affiliated entities.
(ii) To determine credit limit of the representative director, face value of the shares
held by the institution/organization/trust would be considered. Total amount of
loan & advances, guarantees and other credit facilities provided to representative
director or directors, their relatives & dependants and affiliated entities should not
exceed 50% of the face value of shares of that bank-company held in
institution/organization/trust’s name.
(iii)For providing loan & advances, guarantee & other financial facilities to
representative directors, copy of approval of the board of the shareholder
institution/organization/trust should be submitted to Bangladesh Bank along with
the application for approval.
3.4
Regulations for Alternate Directors’ Loan:
No loan facility can be provided to an alternate director, his/her sole proprietorship
firm, his/her partnership firm, private or public company where he/she is acting as a
director, any person or entity for whom he/she stands as a guarantor, and his/her spouse,
father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister and dependents; tenure or credit limit of
facilities provided earlier cannot be extended or enhanced, interest waiver cannot be
allowed or charging of interest cannot be withheld.
3.5
Special Regulations for Government Nominated Directors’ Loan:
(i) No new loan and advances, guarantee, surety or any other financial facility can be
provided to a Government nominated director, his/her sole proprietorship firms,
his/her partnership firms, private or public company where he/she is acting as a
director, his/her spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister and
dependents; and, limit of credit facilities provided earlier cannot be enhanced.
(ii) Waiver of any accrued interest or requisites for rescheduling, or changes in the
conditions of any existing facilities to such director, his/her relatives & dependants
and affiliated entities, cannot be allowed, even if those facilities were extended
before the commencement of his/her tenure as a director. In case of renewing
existing loan and other facilities, all applicable regulations should be followed.

--- Page 5 ---
(iii)In the event of default of any existing facilities to such director, his/her relatives &
dependants and affiliated entities, prompt legal action for recovery has to be
initiated; and, among other measures, Bangladesh Bank and Bank & Financial
Institutions Department (Ministry of Finance) have to be notified on an urgent
basis.
Additional Regulations for Managing Director/CEO’s Loan:
(i) During his/her tenure at the bank-company, no new loan and advances, guarantee,
surety or any other financial facility can be provided to the MD/CEO, his/her sole
proprietorship firms, his/her partnership firms, private or public company where
he/she holds more than 5% share of equity; and, limit of credit facilities provided
earlier cannot be enhanced. In case of renewing existing loan and other facilities,
all applicable regulations should be followed.
(ii) No loan & advances, or guarantee or other facilities can be provided to MD/CEO’s
spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister and dependents without any
security. Such credit facilities should be approved by the majority member of the
board of directors, and mortgage securities thereof should be registered in favour
of the bank-company. Credit facilities exceeding taka 10.00 million should be
reported to Bangladesh Bank after the approval of the board of directors.
(iii)Waiver of any loan or part of loan and interest thereof that has been transferred to
income account of the bank-company cannot be allowed to the MD/CEO, his/her
relatives & dependants and affiliated entities. Prior approval of Bangladesh Bank
will be required in case of waiving accrued interest or part thereof arising from
such loans.
(iv) The provisions of this circular will not be applicable for the bank-company’s
employee/staff loans and advances.
Additional Regulations for Significant Shareholders’ Loan:
(i) Loans & advances, guarantee and financial facilities exceeding taka 10.00 million
extended to a significant shareholder of the bank-company, his/her spouse, private
or public company where he/she is acting as a director or holds more than 5%
share of equity, should be reported to Bangladesh Bank after the approval of the
board of directors.
(ii) Waiver of any loan or part of loan and interest thereof that has been transferred to
income account of the bank-company cannot be allowed to a significant
shareholder, his/her spouse and aforesaid affiliated entities. Prior approval of
Bangladesh Bank will be required in case of waiving accrued interest or part
thereof arising from such loans.
This circular has been issued for compliance of section 26Ga, 27 & 28 of the Bank
Company Ain, 1991. The Chief Executive Officer will inform about this circular to the
directors and other related persons.

--- Page 6 ---
This circular is issued with immediate effect. After this circular becomes effective,
BRPD Circular No.07 dated 12 August 1996, BRPD Circular Letter No.08 dated 23
March 1999, BRPD Circular No.07 dated 05 August 1999, BRPD Circular No.11 dated 20
September 1999, BRPD Circular Letter No.20 dated 25 October 1999, BRPD Circular
No.01 dated 30 January 2000, BRPD Circular No.03 dated 06 February 2001, BRPD
Circular No.19 dated 24 October 2001 and BRPD Circular No.02 dated 21 January 2002
will be treated as void.

Yours faithfully,

(Saiful Islam)
Deputy General Manager
Phone :9530155

--- Page 7 ---
Directors’ Loan Application Form

Name & Address of loan applicant person/organization:
Nature of organization (sole proprietorship/partnership/private/public company):
Applicant’s Paid-up capital & Net worth:
a) Nature of business:
b) Purpose of loan:
Name of Group(where applicable):
Name & Address of applying organization’s owners/partners/directors:
Name & address of guarantor/guarantors:
Name of the concerned director & relationship between applicant & director:
Description of loan applied for:
(In lac taka)
Amount
Type
new
renewal
enhancement
total
tenure
Interest rate
a. funded loan






b. non-funded loan






Total(a+b)






10.
Description of security
(In lac taka)
Primary security
Collateral
Type
Description*
value
Description*
value
Total value
a. funded loan





b. non-funded loan





Total(a+b)





(*nature of security, quantity, etc. should be described in details as much as possible)
11.
Up-to-date description of loans to the director, his/her relatives and affiliated
entities from own bank [loan of institution/organization/trust should be included in the
case of representative director]:
(In lac taka)
Name
of the
A/C
Loan
Type(OD,
CC, term
etc.)
Sanctioned
amount &
date
Outstanding
(date)
Date
of
expiry
Description
of
securities
& value
Classification
status
comme
nts








12.
Up to date description of the applicant and related director’s exposure in other
banks/FIs:
(In lac taka)
Name
of the
A/C
Name
of
bank/FI,
branch
Loan
Type(OD,
CC, term
etc)
Sanctioned
amount &
date
Outstan
ding
(date)
Date of
expiry
Descript
ion
of
securitie
value
Classif
ication
status
com
ment

--- Page 8 ---
13.
Description of loans to the director & his/her concerns [including proposed loan]
and shareholding (in applicant bank) in director’s own name [N.B. Section 3.1(ka)]:
(In lac taka)
Total loan amount*
No of shareholding in the
name of the director
Share value
Percentage(%)




(*In case of public limited company, the director’s loan will be proportionate to
shareholding by the director in that company.)
14.
Description of loans to the representative director, his/her affiliated entities; and,
exposures [including the proposed loan] & shareholding of the nominating
institution/organization/trust in applicant bank [N.B. Section 3.3(2)]:
(In lac taka)
Total loan*
No. Of Shareholding by the
institution/organization/trustee
Share valuation
Percentage(%)




(*In case of public limited company, the director’s loan will be proportionate to
shareholding by the director in that company.)
15.
Description of loan facilities to or for the benefit of bank-related persons including
the proposed loan :
(In lac taka)
Total loan
Tier-1 capital of bank
Percentage (%)



(To be filled up only when the proposed loan is bank-related person’s loan according to
section 26Ga of BCA, 1991)
16.
Has the credit risk been analyzed for proposed loan? If yes, mention the result:
17.
Has prior approval from BB been taken for any previous loan for this
applicant/director? If yes, mention the reference and date of approval [attach copy of
approval letter]:
18.
Has any previous loan proposal of the applicant been rejected by BB? If yes,
mention the reference and date [attach copy of the letter]:
I hereby certify that the above mentioned information is correct and no information has
been concealed.

Date:





Signature


Name


Managing Director/CEO
(with the official seal)