--- Page 1 ---
Website: www.bb.org.bd



Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
January 01, 2014
Dhaka
BRPD Circular No- 01 Date:-----------------------
Paush 18, 1420

Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,

Amendment of Guidelines on Risk Based Capital Adequacy (RBCA).

(Revised Regulatory Capital Framework for banks in Line with Basel II)
Please refer to BRPD Circular No. 35 dated December 29, 2010 regarding the issuance of
Guidelines on Risk Based Capital Adequacy (RBCA) for banks.

As per RBCA guidelines, the capital requirement for credit risk is based on the risk
assessment made by External Credit Assessment Institutions (ECAIs) recognized by BB for
capital adequacy purposes. Banks are required to assign risk weights to all their on-balance sheet
and off-balance sheet exposures. Risk weights are based on external credit rating which will be
mapped with the BB rating grade or a fixed weight that is specified by BB.

Recently BB has given recognition to ‘The Bangladesh Rating Agency Limited’ (BDRAL), a
new rating Agency only for rating the Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). The credit risk
assessment in this segment requires a specific approach, as the factors affecting the
creditworthiness differ from those compared to large corporate entities and other institutions.
Hence, BB has developed a ‘Credit Rating Methodology for Small and Medium Enterprises’
(Annexure-1) which will ensure uniformity, larger levels of transparency of external credit
assessment and thereby determine the relative creditworthiness of entities belonging to this
segment and thus establish credit discipline in the banking industry. In this manner, BB has
launched SME ratings for banks in Bangladesh.

For the aforesaid purpose, the following amendments have been made to the guidelines on
RBCA, December 2010:

1. A new Para 2.2.9.1 will be added for definition of Claims on SME above 2.2.10 and after
2.2.9 in the chapter 2 of the RBCA Guidelines. Consequently, Para no. 2.2.9, 2.2.10 and 2.3.1
will be rephrased as follows for incorporating the said inclusion:
2.2.9. Claims on corporate: Loans and advances to and investments (excluding equity
exposure) in corporate. “Corporate” refers to any proprietorship, partnership or limited company
that is neither PSE, bank, NBFI nor borrower within the definition of retail portfolio.

Para 2.2.9.1. Claims on Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs): Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs) will be defined in line with the Industrial policy 2010 and Bangladesh
Bank’s SME & SPD circular no.1 dated 19th June, 2011 or any changes thereof made from time
to time.

--- Page 2 ---
Exposure limit:

Any exposure will fall under this category but the risk weight of 75%
will be applicable in case of unrated small enterprise Clients having the exposure limit of BDT
10,000 to BDT 30,00,000 and 100% for exposure of BDT 30,00,000 and above. Any exposure
against Medium Enterprise may be considered for Credit rating and risk weight of 100% will be
assigned against unrated Medium Enterprise clients.
Para 2.2.10. Claims categorized as retail portfolio: Claims (including both fund and non-fund
based) that meet all the four criteria listed below may be considered as retail claims for
regulatory capital purposes and included in a regulatory retail portfolio.


Qualifying criteria
Orientation criterion: The exposure to an individual person or persons.

Product criterion: The exposure takes the form of any of the following product types:

a) Revolving credit and lines of credit (including overdrafts)

b) Term loans and leases (e.g. installment loans, vehicle loans for manufacturing
/production and leases, student and educational loans, micro business facilities and
commitments).


The following claims, both fund and non fund based, will be excluded from retail portfolios:
a) Exposures by way of investments in securities (such as bonds and equities), whether
listed or not;
b) Mortgage loans to the extent that they qualify for treatment as claims secured by
residential property (section 2.2.12) or claims secured by commercial real estate (section
2.2.13);
c) Loans and advances to bank’s own staff which are fully covered by superannuation
benefits and / or mortgage of flat/ house;
d) Consumer finance;
e) Capital market exposures; and
f) Venture capital funds.

Granularity criterion: Exposures under this category must be sufficiently diversified to a
degree that reduces the risks. In order to meet this criterion, aggregate exposure without
considering Credit Risk Mitigation (CRM), to one counterpart should not exceed 0.2% of the
overall exposures under this category excluding past due loans. ‘To one counterpart’ means one
or several entities that may be considered as a single beneficiary

Exposure limit: The maximum aggregate exposure to a person(s) or entity (ies) will be
limited to BDT 1.00 (One) crore.

--- Page 3 ---
Para 2.3.1 External Credit Rating Agency:
Bangladesh Bank has recognized eight credit rating agencies i. e. Credit Rating Agency of
Bangladesh (CRAB) Ltd., Credit Rating Information and Services Limited (CRISL),
National Credit Ratings Ltd. (NCRL), Emerging Credit Rating Ltd. (ECRL), ARGUS Credit
Rating Services Limited (ACRSL), Alpha Credit Rating Limited (ACRL), WASO Credit
Rating Company (BD) Limited and The Bangladesh Rating Agency Limited (BDRAL)
which met the eligibility criteria of ECAIs guidelines (BRPD Circular no. 35/2010) of BB.

BB has also decided that banks may use the ratings (if available) of the following
international credit rating agencies for the purposes of risk weighting their exposure at
abroad:
a) Fitch,
b) Moody's, and
c) Standard & Poor.

2. The Table 1 of the RBCA Guidelines regarding ‘ECAI’s Credit Rating Categories Mapped
with BB Rating Grade’ will be replaced for incorporating the mapping of 07 rating agencies
(Annexure -2) and a separate Table (Table:1.1) will be added including mapping of SME rating
scales with BB’s SME rating grades. (Annexure -3)
3. The Following table will be inserted as SL. No. h (1) between Sl. No. h and Sl. No.- i in the
Table: 2: Risk Weight for Balance Sheet Exposure and in the reporting format at chapter -8,
working sheet 1 and 2 accordingly.

SL. No.
Exposure Type
BB Rating Grade
Risk Weight
h (1)
Claims on SME
SME 1
20
SME 2
40
SME 3
60
SME 4
80
SME 5
120
SME 6
150
Unrated (small enterprise & <BDT 3.00m)
75%


Unrated (small enterprise having ≥
BDT 3.00m & Medium enterprise)
100%

However, the SME rating may not be treated as mandatory.


Please acknowledge receipt.







Yours Sincerely,

SD/-

(Md. Nasiruzzaman )
General Manager
Phone: 9530252

Enclosure: 9(nine) pages.

--- Page 4 ---
Credit Rating
Methodology

For Small and Medium Enterprise (SME)

Annexure-1
2013
Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Basel II Implementation Cell

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents


1. Background ........................................................... .…..03
2. Concepts and definition of SMEs....... .........................03
3. Objectives of SME Rating ………………………….…03
4. Rating Methodology……………………………… ….04
A. Financial Risk...........................................................04
B. Business Risk/Industry Risk................................... 04
C. Management Risk………………………………….05
D. Bank Relationship Risk…………………………....05
E. Financial Security Risk…………………..………..05
F. Other Factors………………………………………05
5. Details Risks Parameters and Score…………..……..06

--- Page 6 ---
Background:


As a move towards facilitating development of Small & Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in
the country and encourage larger levels of transparency and credit discipline, BB proposes to
launch SME Ratings in Bangladesh. The credit risk assessment in this segment requires a
specific approach, as the factors affecting the creditworthiness differ from those compared to
large corporate entities. Hence, to further support the growth for this sector and help the
investors to determine the relative creditworthiness of entities belonging to this segment, SME
Ratings will play a helping hand.


Concepts and Definition of SMEs
The Industrial policy 2010 and accordingly Bangladesh Bank’s SME & SPD circular
no.1 dated 19th June, 2011 defines small and medium enterprises in terms of the value of fixed
assets with replacement cost excluding land and building or in terms the number persons
employed as under-

Category
Industry Type
Value of Fixed Assets
(Tk.)
Number of Persons
Employed
Medium
Manufacturing
>1000 lacs -3000 lacs
100-250
Service/
Trading
100-1500 Lacs
50-100
Small
Manufacturing
50 -1000 lacs
25-99
Service/
Trading
5-100 Lacs
10-25

Objectives of SME rating

Banks and financial institutions are migrating from an individual’s opinion based credit
review process toward a systematic and scientific process with an emphasis on objective inputs.
The main reason for this shift is the need for faster, more accurate, uniform and timely credit
decisions. This can only be possible when highly productive and easy to use tools are provided to
them to help them in their decision-making. There was a need to enhance the existing credit
assessment system with additional features:

a. Comply with Standardized approach of Basel II requirements
b. Creation of risk rating system
c. Help to automate Credit Origination, credit approval process, risk administration and
monitoring functions and management of Non Performing assets
d. Help to provide data feeds for management reporting.

--- Page 7 ---
RATING METHODOLOGY
Both quantitative and qualitative factors should be considered in assessing the SME
operation. The methodology is comprehensive where assessment area concentrates five broad
categories– Financial Risk, Business/Industry Risk, Management Risk, Bank Relationship Risk,
Financial Security Risk and others. Although, the above concentration areas are in line with
corporate rating methodology, the relative weightage for different parameters may differ in
between the two sectors. The financial position (i.e. Balance Sheet and Income Statement) and
Cash flow Statement may be collected as per accounting Standard provided by concerned
regulators that may either be audited or signed by the appropriate authority.

A. FINANCIAL RISK:
SMEs are typically set up as, Proprietorship, partnership or private limited companies.
Each category of SMEs will prepare their own yearly financial statement (B/S, Profit and Loss
A/C, Cash Flow Statement, statement of WC utilization etc.) in a structured format applicable for
them and the same will be provided to the Rating Agencies. Bank transaction statement will also
be provided which may be a good support to justify and assess its business volume.

Assessment of financial risk includes identification of net worth, asset size, liability,
turnover, cost pattern, profitability, cash flow adequacy to debt repayment, and other important
performance indicators (profit margin, ROE, ROA, leverage, liquidity etc). The ratio calculation
is same as in the corporate ratings but adjustment may be made as per the nature of the business.
Analysts are basically entrusted with the responsibility to frame opinion about the entity’s ability
in debt repayment based on its cash flow assessment. The future cash flow estimation against the
debt obligation is also important in SME rating framework.

In addition to above, assessment of the flexibility of the entity in fund arrangement;
especially the relationship with the bank and Assessment of the expected financial support from
the sponsors in any distressed position may be considered. In view, the sponsor(s)’ personal
assets may be assessed specially for sole proprietorship and partnership business.


B. BUSINESS RISK/INDUSTRY RISK:

Business risk/Industry Risk can be termed as “a risk of direct or indirect loss arising due
to deficient or unsuccessful internal systems, process, people or external factors.’’
Business risk arises due to change in market situation and from its own operation infrastructure.
Under the business risk, the sustainability of the business in the changing market situation will be
assessed. Due to the limited scale of operation, business nature differs in different mode like
manufacturing & marketing in a specific geographical region or functioning as support service to
large scale manufacturers or trading of goods through import or local procurement, or even at
agro-based level. A significant number of SMEs are doing their business as the backward
operation of the formal sector; hence, rarely have control over pricing or fully market dependent.
Even market competition is very high due to large number of SMEs in the same business.

--- Page 8 ---
Thus, customer group, performance track record, relationship with the suppliers, business
network and the necessary infrastructures are important in market positioning of an enterprise.
In case of new project in SME sector, the same key consideration factors in the project finance
will be followed but in limited scale. SME project rating Framework would include parameters
like: project viability in respect of market situation, estimated project cost, cost overrun,
implementation plan, competence of the sponsor in implementing new project, estimated cash
generation from the project and also the project location and availability of necessary manpower.

The industry related risks might have impact on the operation of related SMEs. So, the
factors like the scope of diversification, industry size, supply gap, government policy towards the
industry, nature of the product, social desirability, entry and exit barriers etc should be
considered while rating SMEs broadly. As SMEs have presence in majority of the economic
sectors of the economy, these types of enterprise operate as linkage and supportive to the
industry either by products or by services.


C. MANAGEMENT RISK:

SMEs are typically managed by one or two entrepreneurs mostly related as family
members or members from the known community. Unlike corporate, SMEs are rarely managed
by qualified professionals; hence, performance of the enterprise is highly dependent on the
experience and expertise of the entrepreneur in managing the business. A good number of
entrepreneurs do not have formal education, however, involved in the business as inheritance. In
assessing the competence of the promoters, track record and risk taking capacity is an important
consideration in SME rating framework. However, the capacity of the support employees in
many cases to handle the business efficiently may also be considered. Working condition and
relationship between the employer and employees is an important consideration factor. Generally
lenders have good control over the borrowers in SME sector, however, willingness to repay loan
is an important characteristics even having good ability to pay its obligations which is being
reflected by his/her track record. In addition to those, assess the performance of the entrepreneurs
in other business, experience in the same or different line of business, succession of the
entrepreneurs etc. should be assessed rigorously.

D. BANK RELATIONSHIP RISK:

Review of banking relationship is very important in SME rating process. The analyst
team must visit the respective branch to meet with the bank professionals to collect information
about the loan payment history, reason against the delay in payment, utilization performance of
the loan limit, security against the loan, control over the security, and related issues. Any loan
classification may create problem to the respective entity in further borrowing from the bank.

E. Financial Security Risk:

Although security against a loan is a post-default event and has bearing only in recovery
rating, security offered against an SME loan plays an important role in the repayment behavior of
the borrower even in the process of loan repayment. Loan coverage through FDR, hypothecation,
guarantee, collateral, third party guarantee etc. will be considered in the rating evaluation
process.
F. OTHER FACTORS:

Other than the above broad areas, other parameters like legal or environmental issue,
disaster management capacity, impact of subsidies/tax waiver by the government, sudden
business loss, impact of non insurance or inadequate insurance of assets, extraordinary or
windfall gains and losses, impact of the new monetary or fiscal policies or significant
development in the industry should thoroughly be assessed on case to case basis.

--- Page 9 ---
Credit Rating Methodology
For Small and Medium Enterprise

(SME)


Methodology should cover analysis of following risks
parameters (Score 100)
Maximum
Score
Score achieved
by the client
i) Financial Risk (Business Performance and Profitability)
30

Leverage (Less than 0.25-More than 2.75 times)

Liquidity ((Greater than 2.74-Less than 0.70 times)

Profitability (Greater than 25%-Less than 1%)

Coverage ratio (More than 2.00 times-Less than 1.00 times)

Additional Risk Parameters to be assessed
(Profit Margin -Gross & Net, Return On Assets , Return on Equity,
Equity Development Trend (Last 3 years), Trend of Operating cash
flow (OCF), Business as well as personal net worth)
10

ii) Business/Industry Risk
23

Size of Business (Yearly sales in BDT )
Medium-(1 crore or More)
Small-( 25 Lacs or More)
Micro-( 5 Lacs or More)

Age of Business (>5 years -<2 years)

Business Outlook (Favorable-Cause for concern )

Business Growth compared to Industry (Strong-No Growth)

10
Market Competition (Dominant Player-Highly Competitive )

11
Entry/Exit Barriers to Business ( Difficult-Easy)

12
Additional Risk Parameters to be assessed
(Level of Technology/Service, Infrastructure Facility, Government
Policy Toward Industry, Nature of the Product & potentialities /Social
Desirability,
Dependency
on
suppliers/clients,
Trade
mark/Patent/copy
right,
Franchise/dealership,
Marketing
strategy)

--- Page 10 ---
Methodology should cover analysis of following risks
parameters (Score 100)
Maximum
Score
Score achieved by
the client
iii) Management Risk
18

13
Track Records of the sponsors(Excellent- Not Satisfactory)

14
Educational Qualification, Experience & technical know-how of
sponsors/stuffs ( 5 years or more in the related line of business - No
experience)

15
Risk Taking Capacity of Sponsor(s) ( Assessment would be made on
the basis of past experience of sponsors) (High-Low)

16
Personnel Policy & Internal Control System

17
Succession (Ready Succession - Succession in question)

18
Working Environment/Team Work (Very Good- Regular Conflict)

19
Income Tax/VAT payment History

iv) Bank Relationship Risk
12

20
Relationship with bank (Maintain accounts for 3 (three) years or
more with faultless record- Account(s) says Frequent Past dues &
Irregular dealings)

21
Current Status of Loans(Regular-Classified)

22
Compliance of covenants/conditions-If any (Full Compliance - Non
Compliance)

23
Personal Deposit (Personal accounts of the key business Sponsors
are maintained with banks) (with significant deposits - No
depository relationship)

v) Financial Security Risk
10

24
Security Coverage(Primary)
(Capable for fully pledged /cash cover/ Reg. Mortgage – Not
capable to provide security)

25
Collateral coverage (Property Location)
(Capable for Registered Mortgage on Municipal corporation /Prime
area property- Not capable for providing such collateral)

26
Support/Guarantee (Capable Personal guarantee or Corporate
Guarantee - Not capable for Support/ Guarantee )

27
Legal Intervention regarding security Coverage (Fair-Disputed)

VI) Other Factors
28
Legal /Environmental Issue (Complied- Not Complied)

29
Disaster Management capacity (Excellent- Not Satisfactory )

30
Insurance (yes- No)

31
Govt. Subsidies/Tax Waiver( Favorable - unfavorable)

32
Any other Material risk factor


Total
100


N.B: 1. Each External Credit Assessment Institutions (ECAIs) should prepare the sector wise
industry average of SME on all risk parameters and this industry average will be considered
while assigning score for the purpose of rating of the client.
2. Each Qualitative Factor related to rating report requires further explanation.

--- Page 11 ---
Annexure-2

Table: 1-ECAI’s Credit Rating Categories Mapped with BB Rating Grade

BB
Rating
Grade
Equivalent
Rating
of
S&P and Fitch
Equivalent Rating
of Moody
Equivalent Rating of
CRISL
Equivalent
Rating
of CRAB
Equivalent
Rating
of NCRL
Equivalent Rating
of ECRL
Equivalent Rating
of ACRSL
Equivalent Rating
of ACRL
Equivalent Rating
of WASO
AAA to AA
Aaa to Aa
AAA,
AA+, AA, AA-
AAA,
AA1, AA2, AA3
AAA,
AA+, AA, AA-
AAA,
AA+, AA, AA-
AAA,
AA+, AA, AA-
AAA,
AA+, AA, AA-
AAA
AA1, AA2, AA3
A+, A, A-
A1, A2, A3
A+, A, A-
A+, A, A-
A+, A, A-
A+, A, A-
A1, A2, A3
BBB
Baa
BBB+, BBB, BBB-
BBB1, BBB2, BBB3
BBB+, BBB, BBB-
BBB+,
BBB,
BBB-
BBB+, BBB, BBB-
BBB+, BBB, BBB-
BBB1, BBB2,
BBB3
BB to B
Ba to B
BB+, BB, BB-
BB1, BB2, BB3
BB+, BB, BB-
BB+, BB, BB-
BB+, BB, BB-
BB+, BB, BB-
BB1, BB2, BB3
Below B
Below B
B+, B, B-,
CCC+, CCC, CCC-,
CC+, CC, CC-
B1, B2, B3,
CCC1, CCC2, CCC3,
CC
B+, B, B-

B+, B, B-

B+, B, B-,
CC+,CC,CC-
B+, B, B-,
CCC
B1, B2, B3, CCC
C+, C, C-, D
C, D
C+, C, C-, D
C+, C, C-, D
CC+,CC,
CC-,
C+, C, C-, D
CC1, CC2, CC3,
C+, C, C-, D
Short-Term Rating Category Mapping
S1
F1+
P1
ST-1
ST-1
N1
ECRL-1
ST-1
AR-1
P-1
S2
F1
P2
ST-2
ST-2
N2
ECRL-2
ST-2
AR-2
P-2
S3
F2
P3
ST-3
ST-3
N3
ECRL-3
ST-3
AR-3
P-3
S4
F3

NP
ST-4
ST-4
N4
ECRL-4
ST-4
AR-4
P-4
S5,S6
B,C, D
ST-5, ST-6
ST-5, ST-6
N5
ST-5, ST-6
AR-5, AR-6
P-5, P-6

--- Page 12 ---
Annexure-3


Table: 1.1-ECAI’s Credit Rating Categories Mapped with BB’s SME Rating Grade.





BB’s SME Rating Grade
Equivalent rating of BDRAL
SME 1
SE1, ME 1
SME 2
SE2, ME 2
SME 3
SE3, ME 3
SME 4
SE4, ME 4
SME 5
SE5, ME 5
SME 6
SE6, SE7, SE8, ME 6 ME 7, ME 8