--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 7

Website: www.bb.org.bd

Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka


January 16, 2014
BRPD Circular No. 02
Date: -----------------------





Magh 03, 1420

Managing Directors/Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh


Dear Sir,

Single Borrower Exposure Limit

Please refer to BRPD Circular No. 05 dated April 09, 2005 on the captioned
subject.
In order to comply with the recently incorporated section–26(Kha) of the
Banking Companies Act, 1991 and to improve bank’s credit risk management further,
Bangladesh Bank is issuing this circular consolidating all instructions issued so far on
the subject and making some amendments.

1) Definition and Interpretation – For the purpose of this circular:
a) “Capital” – means the capital held by banks as per Clause (1) of Section-13 of
the Banking Companies Act, 1991.
b) “Exposure” – means credit exposure (funded and non-funded) and refers to all
claims, commitments and contingent liabilities arising from on and off-balance
sheet
transactions,
which
include,
but
not
limited
to,
outstanding
loans/financing facilities, advances and receivables. These amounts comprise
outstanding balance (i.e. principal amount and accrued interest/profit) which
has not yet been repaid as at reporting date;
i) “Funded Exposure” – means the exposure for which the bank has provided
or shall provide funds to the borrower or to a third party on behalf of the
borrower;
ii) “Non-funded Exposure” – means the off-balance sheet exposure which has
not yet been funded by the bank and may or may not be converted into

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 7

funded facilities in future. Examples, letter of credit, guarantee, acceptance,
commitment etc;
iii) “Large Loan” – defined in Paragraph-2(b)(i) of this circular as per Clause (2)
of Section-26Kha of the Banking Companies Act, 1991.
c) “Non-conforming Exposure” – if an exposure is within the limit [limit set forth
in Paragraph-2(a)] when made but subsequently exceeds the limit, the exposure
will be treated as ‘non-conforming’ which may arise from any of the following
circumstances:
i) the bank’s capital declines;
ii) the borrower merges or forms a common enterprise with another borrower;
iii) the bank merges with another bank which also holds exposures to the
borrower;
iv) capital rules or the lending limits undergo changes;
d) “Person” – means a natural person or a legal person i.e., company,
corporation, associate, trust, joint venture, partnership or other business
enterprise etc.
e) “Group” – two or more persons shall be deemed to be a group if one person has
the ability, directly or indirectly, to control the other person(s) or to exercise
significant influence over the financial and operating decisions of the other
person(s), or if both persons are subject to common control or common
significant influence. Group exists if at least one of the following criteria is
satisfied:
i) Control Relationship: When one person, directly or indirectly, has control
over the other(s). To assess connectedness through control, the criterion is
met automatically if one person owns more than 50% of the voting rights of
another person. However, control can also be assumed when one person has
significant influence (owns 20% or more but less than 50% of the voting
rights) on the other person. In addition to establishing connectedness based
on control, banks shall consider, at a minimum, the following criteria:
(1) Voting agreements (e.g. control of a majority of voting rights pursuant to
an agreement with other shareholders);
(2) Significant influence on the appointment or dismissal of an entity’s
administrative, management or supervisory body, such as the right to
appoint or remove a majority of members in those bodies, or the capacity
to appoint a majority of members solely as a result of the exercise of an
individual entity’s voting rights;
(3) Significant influence on senior management, e.g. one person has the
power, pursuant to a contract or otherwise, to exercise a controlling

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 of 7

influence over the management or policies of another person (e.g.
through consent rights over key decisions);
(4) Banks are also expected to refer to criteria specified in appropriate
internationally recognized accounting standards for further qualitatively
based guidance when determining control.
ii) Economic Interdependence: Economic dependence of one party on another
or more other parties results in all of them being considered connected. That
is, if one of them were to experience financial problems, in particular
funding or repayment difficulties, the other or all of the others would, as a
result, also be likely to encounter funding or repayment difficulties. For
guidance
on
establishing
connectedness
based
on
economic
interdependence, banks shall consider, at a minimum, the following
qualitative criteria:
(1) When 50 percent or more of one counterparty's gross receipts or gross
expenditures (on an annual basis) is derived from transactions with the
other counterparty;
(2) When one counterparty has fully or partly guaranteed the exposure of
the other counterparty, or is liable by other means, and the exposure is
so significant for the guarantor that it is likely to default if a claim
occurs;
(3) When the expected source of repayment for each loan is the same and
neither counterparty has another source of income from which the loan
may be fully repaid;
(4) Where it is likely that the financial problems of one counterparty would
cause difficulties for the other counterparties in terms of full and timely
repayment of liabilities;
(5) Where the insolvency or default of one of them is likely to be associated
with the insolvency or default of the other(s).

2) Exposure Limits – The following limits shall apply:
a) Single Person/Counterparty or Group:
i) The outstanding amount of exposure, both funded and non-funded, to a
single person/counterparty or a group shall not exceed 35% of the capital at
any point of time.
ii) The aggregate outstanding principal amount of funded exposures shall not
exceed 15% of the capital at any point of time.
iii) In case of export financing, the outstanding amount of exposure, both
funded
and
non-funded,
at
any
point
of
time
to
single
person/counterparty or a group shall not exceed 50% of the capital.
However, the aggregate outstanding principal amount of funded exposures
shall not exceed 15% of the capital at any point of time.

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 7

b) Large Loan:
i) Large loan refers to any exposure to a single person/counterparty or a group
which is equal to or greater than 10% of the capital.
ii) The banks may sanction large loans as per the following limits set against
their respective classified loans:
Rate of Net Classified Loans
Large Loan Portfolio Ceiling against
Bank's Total Loans & Advances
Upto 5%
56%
More than 5% but upto 10%
52%
More than 10% but upto 15%
48%
More than 15% but upto 20%
44%
More than 20%
40%

In order to determine the above Large Loan Portfolio Ceiling of any bank, 50% credit
equivalent of all non-funded credit facilities shall be included in the Total Loans and
Advances (i.e., 100% funded exposures plus 50% non-funded exposures). However,
the entire amount of non-funded credit facilities shall be included in the Large Loan
Portfolio.
For example, let a bank’s Net Classified Loans is 5%. According to the large loan policy,
the bank may have large loan exposures up to 56% of its total Loans & Advances
whereas total Loans & Advances is calculated as 100% funded exposures plus 50% non-
funded exposures. However, while calculating Large Loan Portfolio both funded and
non-funded credit facilities will be considered as 100% credit equivalent. So, the large
loan portfolio ceiling formula for the bank is as follows:
(Total Funded Large Loan Exposure*100%+ Total Non-funded Large Loan Exposure*100%)
(Bank’s Total Funded Exposure*100%+ Banks Total Non-funded Exposure*50%)

3) Exceptions: In order to allow banks to accommodate prudently the genuine credit
needs of creditworthy borrowers, notwithstanding anything contained in this
circular, the following exceptions shall be applicable to the limits set forth:
a) A public limited company, which has 50% or more public shareholdings, shall
not be considered as an enterprise/organization of any group.
b) In case of credit facilities provided to the government or against government
guarantees and AAA rated Multilateral Development Banks’ (MDBs) guarantee,
the aforementioned restrictions set forth in Paragraph-2(a) shall not be
applicable.
[Note: Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) include: the World Bank Group
comprising the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
≤ 56%

--- Page 5 ---
Page 5 of 7

and the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the Asian Development Bank
(ADB), the African Development Bank (AfDB), the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the Inter-American Development
Bank (IADB), the European Investment Bank (EIB), the European Investment
Fund (EIF), the Nordic Investment Bank (NIB), the Caribbean Development
Bank (CDB), the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) and the Council of Europe
Development Bank (CEDB).]
c) In case of credit facilities sanctioned by the banks to the borrowers in order to
produce, transmit and distribute electricity against any award provided by the
Power Division of the Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources or the
institutions controlled by the said division [such as – Bangladesh Power
Development Board (BPDB), Rural Electrification Board (REB), Power Grid
Company of Bangladesh (PGCB), Electricity Generation Company of Bangladesh
(EGCB), Dhaka Power Distribution Company (DPDC), Dhaka Electric Supply
Company Limited (DESCO), Ashuganj Power Station Company Limited (APSCL),
West Zone Power Distribution Company (WZPDCO), North West Zone Power
Distribution Company Limited (NWZPGC)], the aforementioned restrictions set
forth in Paragraph-2(a) shall not be applicable.
d) In case of interbank money market transactions with a contractual maturity of
less than one year, the aforementioned restrictions set forth in Paragraph-2(a)
and Paragraph-2(b) shall not be applicable.
e) In case of loans backed by cash and encashable securities (e.g. FDR of the same
bank), the aforementioned restrictions set forth in Paragraph-2(a) and
Paragraph-2(b) shall not be applicable and the actual financing facilities shall
be determined by deducting the amount from the outstanding of principal
balance of the loans.
4) Prudential Norms:
a) Banks shall collect the loan information on their borrowers from Credit
Information Bureau (CIB) of Bangladesh Bank before sanctioning, renewing or
rescheduling loans in order to ensure that credit facilities are not being
provided to defaulters.
b) Banks must assess credit risk by adopting Credit Risk Grading (CRG) before
sanctioning or renewing large loans. If the rating of a CRG turns out to be
"Marginal", banks shall not sanction the large loan, but it can consider renewal
of an existing large loan taking into account other favorable conditions and
factors. However, if the result of a CRG is “Special Mention Account (SMA)”,
neither sanction nor renewal of large loans can be considered.

--- Page 6 ---
Page 6 of 7

c) While sanctioning or renewing of large loans, banks should assess their
borrower's overall debt repayment capacity by taking into consideration the
borrower's liabilities with other banks and financial institutions.
d) Banks shall examine their borrower's Cash Flow Statement, Audited Balance
Sheet, Income Statement and other financial statements to make sure that their
borrower has the ability to repay the loan.
e) Sanctioning, renewing or rescheduling of large loans shall be approved by the
Board of Directors in case of local banks. Such decisions will be taken by the
Chief Executive in case of foreign banks. However, while approving proposals of
large loans, among other things, compliance with this circular must be
ensured.
f) When two or more banks collectively provide credit to a borrower under a
common loan facility (e.g. a syndicated loan), the loan limits in Paragraph 2(a)
apply only to the funds provided by each bank and represent that bank’s pro
rata share of the total loan.
g) The group of counterparties poses a “single risk”, akin to that of a single
counterparty. Such a group is referred to as a group of connected
counterparties. Banks shall evaluate the relationship amongst clients, with
reference to Paragraph (1.e.i.) and Paragraph (1.e.ii), in order to assess the
existence and the extent of a single risk. However, banks must exercise a
reasonable degree of due diligence including the ‘Know Your Customer (KYC)’
principle in obtaining sufficient information on their customers to determine
interconnectedness.
h) If an exposure becomes ‘non-conforming’ for any reason as mentioned in
Paragraph-1(c) the Chief Executive of banks are required to act promptly to
bring the exposure into compliance unless doing so would be inconsistent with
prudent banking practices and adversely affect the ultimate recovery of the
exposure. Such non-conforming exposures may be renewed, have their maturity
extended or be restructured without violating this circular provided –
i) there is no increase in the amount of the exposure, either direct or indirect;
ii) security collateral, if any, shall not be released;
iii) there is no change in the borrower with the exception of changes resulting
from a merger of the borrower with another person;
iv) the renewal, extension or reschedule is not otherwise designed to avoid the
requirements of existing policies, rules & regulations as determined by
Bangladesh Bank;

--- Page 7 ---
Page 7 of 7

v) Banks shall report such exposure, if any, to the Department of Off-site
Supervision of Bangladesh Bank.
5) Risk Management Expectations:
a) Banks shall follow the instructions regarding Credit Risk Management
Guidelines, Risk Management Guidelines for Banks and all other related
policies issued by Bangladesh Bank from time to time.
b) Although certain types of exposures and counterparties are excluded from the
single borrower limit [as specified in Paragraph 3], these exposures are not risk-
free. Banks should have adequate procedures and controls in place to monitor
these exposures. In addition, banks shall also ensure that its portfolios are not
overly concentrated in large loans.
6) Each bank shall submit the periodic statement of large loan, in specified format, to
the Department of Off-site Supervision of Bangladesh Bank as per instructions
given by the department (DOS).
7) This circular has been issued by Bangladesh Bank in exercise of its power
conferred on it under sections–26(Kha) and 45 of the Banking Companies Act,
1991.
8) Instructions of BRPD Circular No. 05 dated April 09, 2005 and subsequent all
Circulars/Circular letters on the captioned subject hereby stand superseded by
this circular. This circular shall come into force with immediate effect.


Please acknowledge receipt.


Yours Sincerely,


(Md. Anwarul Islam)
Deputy General Manager
Phone-9530094