--- Page 1 ---
বাংলাদেশ ব্যাঙ্ক

(সেন্ট্রাল ব্যাংক অব বাংলাদেশ)
প্রধান SATA পেমেন্ট সিস্টেমস ডিপার্টমেন্ট
মতিঝিল, ঢাকা-১০০০
বাংলাদেশ | ০৬ জুন, ২০২৪
পিএসডি সার্কুলার নং: ০৬/২০২৪ IC
২৩ জ্যৈষ্ঠ, ১৪৩১
ব্যবস্থপনা পরিচালক/ প্রধান নির্বাহী কর্মকর্তা
Prepaid Instrument (7১1) ইস্যুকারী ও ইস্যু করতে ইচ্ছুক প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহ
প্রধান কার্যালয় |
প্রিয় মহোদয়,

‘Guidelines for issuing Prepaid Instrument (PI) by non-payment system entities, 2024’ প্রসঙ্গে |

দেশে পণ্য/ সেবা ক্রয়-বিক্রয়ের ক্ষেত্রে সীমিত পরিসরে কর্পোরেট প্রতিষ্ঠান ও মা্কেটপ্লেসসমূহের ইস্যুকৃত বিভিন্ন ধরনের/ নামের
ভাউচার, গিফট্‌ কার্ড ইত্যাদি প্রি-পেইড Bayard ব্যবহার করা হয়ে থাকে। প্রযুক্তির উন্নয়নের ফলে এ সকল প্রি-পেইড SOs
ইস্যু ও অনলাইনে ক্রয়-বিক্রয়ের পরিসর দিন দিন বৃদ্ধি পাচ্ছে। এ ধরনের প্রি-পেইড ইন্সটুমেন্ট ইস্যু ও বিক্রয়ের মাধ্যমে গ্রাহক হতে
অগ্িম অর্থ সংগ্রহের মাধ্যমে একদিকে বিক্রেতা প্রতিষ্ঠান উপকৃত হচ্ছে, অপরদিকে গ্রাহক এ সকল প্রি-পেইড ইন্সট্রুমেন্ট ব্যবহার করে
পরবর্তীতে ছাড়কৃত মূলে পণ্য/ সেবা ক্রয়ের সুযোগ পাচ্ছেন। এ সুযোগে কিছু অসাধু ব্যবসায়ী কর্তৃক লোভনীয় ছাড়কৃত মূল্যে এ সকল
প্রি-পেইড Byard ইস্যু ও বিক্রয়ের মাধ্যমে গ্রাহক হতে বিপুল পরিমাণ অর্থ অগ্রিম গ্রহণের পর গ্রাহককে এর বিনিময়ে কাংখিত
পণ্য/সেবা সরবরাহ না করার বিষয়েও অভিযোগ রয়েছে। গ্রাহক স্বার্থ বিবেচনায় গণপ্রজাতন্ত্রী বাংলাদেশ সরকার-এর বাণিজ্য মন্ত্রণালয়
কর্তৃক জারিকৃত ডিজিটাল কমার্স পরিচালনা নির্দেশিকা, ২০২১ এর ৩.১.৯ অনুচ্ছেদে সকল ধরনের ডিজিটাল ওয়ালেট, গিফ্ট কার্ড,
ক্যাশ ভাউচার বা অন্য কোন মাধ্যম যা অর্থের বিকল্প হিসাবে ব্যবহৃত হতে পারে তা বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংকের বিদ্যমান নীতিমালা অনুসরণ
এবং প্রয়োজনীয় ক্ষেত্রে বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক এর অনুমতি ব্যতিরেকে তৈরি (Issue), ব্যবহার বা ক্রয়-বিক্রয় করা যাবে না মর্মে নির্দেশনা
প্রদান করা হয়েছে। বর্ণিত প্রেক্ষাপটে প্রি-পেইড ইন্সটুমেন্ট-এর আর্থিক ও পরিচালন ঝুঁকি হ্রাস এবং গ্রাহক স্বার্থ সংরক্ষণের লক্ষ্যে এ
ধরনের প্রি-পেইড Sard ইস্যুর বিষয়ে একটি নীতিমালা থাকা প্রয়োজন |

০২. এক্ষণে, গ্রাহকের আর্থিক ঝুঁকি হাসের লক্ষ্যে সংযুক্ত ‘Guidelines for issuing Prepaid Instrument (PI) by non-
payment system entities, 2024’ শীর্ষক নীতিমালা জারি করা হলো। ব্যাংক, আর্থিক প্রতিষ্ঠান বা বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক কর্তৃক
লাইসেন্স প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহ ব্যতিরেকে অন্যান্য সকল প্রতিষ্ঠানের ভাউচার বা গিফটু কার্ড বা অন্য কোন ধরনের/ নামের প্রিপেইড
ইন্সট্রমেন্ট (যা অর্থের বিকল্প হিসাবে ব্যবহার হয় বা হওয়ার সুযোগ রয়েছে) ইস্যু এবং বিক্রয় করার ক্ষেত্রে নীতিমালাটি পরিপালনের
জন্য সংশ্লিষ্ট সকলকে নির্দেশনা প্রদান করা হলো। এতদ্বিষয়ে ০৬ জুন ২০২৪ তারিখে জারিকৃত প্রজ্ঞাপন নং
পিএসডি/এডিসিএন্ডএল(পলিসি)/১/২০২৪-১৫৪৭ এর অনুলিপি এতদৃসঙ্গে সংযুক্ত করা হলো।

০৩. আপনাদের অবগতি ও প্রয়োজনীয় কার্যার্থে জারি করা হলো।

(মৌ মোতাছিম বিল্লাহ)
পরিচালক, পিএসডি
ফোন: ৯৫৩০৩৩৪

ফোন : ৮৮-০২-৯৫৫০৪৪৮, ৯৫৫৪৮৯৬, আইপি 3 ৮৮-০২-৫৫৬৬৫০০১-৬, ফ্যাক্স : ৮৮-০২-৯৫৩০৪৭৯, Web : www.bb.org.bd

--- Page 2 ---
বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক
প্রজ্ঞাপন

তারিখ: ০৬ জুন ২০২৪ মোতাবেক ২৩ জ্যৈষ্ঠ ১৪৩১

সূত্র নং পিএসডি/এডিসিএন্ডএল(পলিসি)/১/২০২৪-১৫৪৭ গণপ্রজাতন্ত্রী বাংলাদেশ সরকার কর্তৃক প্রকাশিত “ডিজিটাল কমার্স
পরিচালনা নির্দেশিকা ২০২১” এর ৩.১.৯ ক্রমিকের উদ্দেশ্য পূরণকল্পে এবং পরিশোধ ব্যবস্থায় গ্রাহকের আর্থিক ঝুঁকি হাসের লক্ষ্যে
বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক অর্ডার ১৯৭২ (২০০৩ পর্যন্ত সংশোধিত) এর ধারা ৭এ(ই), ১৬ (২৫), এবং ১৬ (২৬) এ প্রদত্ত ক্ষমতাবলে
“Guidelines for issuing Prepaid Instrument (PI) by non-payment system entities, 2024” শীর্ষক
নীতিমালা গত ০৬/০৫/২০২৪ তারিখের পিএসডি সার্কুলার নং ০৬/২০২৪ এর মাধ্যমে জারি করা হয়েছে।

০২। “Guidelines for issuing Prepaid Instrument (PI) by non-payment system entities, 2024” শীর্ষক
নীতিমালাটি বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংক কর্তৃক সার্কুলার জারির তারিখ হতে কার্যকর হবে এবং বাংলাদেশের অভ্যন্তরে কার্যরত সকল ধরনের
প্রতিষ্ঠানের ভাউচার বা গিফট্‌ কার্ড বা অন্য কোন ধরনের/ নামের প্রিপেইড Bord (যা অর্থের বিকল্প হিসাবে ব্যবহার হয় বা
হওয়ার সুযোগ রয়েছে) ইস্যু এবং বিক্রয় করার ক্ষেত্রে প্রযোজ্য হবে।

কাজী ছাইদুর রহমান
ডেপুটি গভর্নর

--- Page 3 ---
Page 1 of 15

Guidelines for issuing Prepaid Instrument (PI)
by non-payment system entities, 2024
















Payment Systems Department
Bangladesh Bank

--- Page 4 ---
Page 2 of 15

June, 2024


Amendment History

Date
Version
Amendments
June, 2024
1.0
Initial Document

--- Page 5 ---
Page 3 of 15

Contents
Clause
Content
Page
Prepaid Instrument (PI)
Classification of PI
Scope
Mandate
Chapter-1: Closed Prepaid Instrument (PI)
4-8
Definition (Closed PI)
Eligibilities for issuing closed PI
Issuance of closed PI
Application for approval
Approval from Bangladesh Bank
Restrictions on uses of closed PI
PI authentication
Selling points of closed PI
Customer’s risk awareness
10
Liability of the issuer
11
Buyer identification
12
Face value
13
Limit for issuer
14
Individual and corporate limits
15
Expiry of closed PI
16
Provisions for expired PI
17
Discount
18
Dispute resolution
19
Reporting requirement
20
Supervision and penalty
Chapter-2: Semi-closed Prepaid Instrument (PI)
9-13
21
Definition (Semi-closed PI)
22
Eligibilities for issuing semi-closed PI
23
Issuance of semi-closed PI
24
Application for approval
25
Approval from Bangladesh Bank
10
26
Restrictions on uses of semi-closed PI
10
27
PI authentication
10
28
Selling points of semi-closed PI
10
29
Customer’s risk awareness
10
30
Acceptability of semi-closed PI
11
31
Liability of the issuer
11
32
Buyer identification
11
33
Face value
11
34
Limit for issuer
11
35
Individual and corporate limits
12
36
Expiry of semi-closed PI
12
37
Provisions for expired PI
12
38
Discount
12
39
Dispute resolution
12
40
Reporting requirement
13
41
Supervision and penalty
13
Annexure-A
14
Annexure-B
15

--- Page 6 ---
Page 4 of 15

Guidelines for issuing Prepaid Instrument (PI) by non-payment system entities, 2024
Prepaid Instrument (PI): Prepaid Instrument (PI) is an instrument that represents a stored value in BDT
acquired in exchange of money that enables the bearer/ person to make payments for goods and services.
The stored value of such PI is accepted by the beneficiaries as an alternative to money.
Classification of PIs:
a) Closed Prepaid Instrument (PI)
b) Semi-closed Prepaid Instrument (PI) and
c) Open Prepaid Instrument (PI)
Scope: Whatever is the name including but not limited to voucher, cash card, gift card, reward card and
so on, if the instrument resembles to the definition of closed and semi-closed PI, issued by non-payment
system (not licensed by Bangladesh Bank) and non-government entities shall be under the purview of
these guidelines. On the other hand, only Banks, NBFIs, Mobile Financial Service (MFS) Providers, and
Payment Service Providers (PSP) are authorized to issue open prepaid instrument (PI) and shall not be
under the purview of these guidelines.
Mandate: These Guidelines have been issued in exercise of the power conferred under clauses 7A (e),
16(25) and 16(26) of the Bangladesh bank Order 1972, and clauses 3.1.9 and 3.1.10 of “Digital
Commerce Porichalona Nirdeshika 2021” issued by the Ministry of Commerce on 04/07/2021.

Chapter-1
Closed Prepaid Instrument (PI)

1. Definition (Closed PI):
A closed prepaid instrument (PI), issued under these guidelines by a merchant, is an instrument
that represents a stored value in BDT acquired in exchange of money that enables the bearer/
person to make payments for goods and services from the issuer.

2. Eligibilities for issuing Closed PI:
a) A legal entity, registered under Company Act, 1994 and that has saleable goods and services in its
stock, and satisfies the conditions of these guidelines shall be eligible for issuing closed PI.
b) The entity should have business activity in Bangladesh for minimum 5 (Five) years.
c) The entity shall have the audited financial statements for previous 5 (Five) years.
d) The entity shall have a minimum paid-up capital of BDT 20 (Twenty) crores.

3. Issuance of Closed PI:
a) The eligible entities intending to issue closed PI shall take approval from Bangladesh Bank for
issuing such PI.
b) Closed PI can be issued in physical or digital forms.
c) Closed PI shall not be reloadable.
d) Issuer may issue and sell multiple types of closed PIs.
e) Closed PI shall be activated within maximum 24 hours of the issuance.

--- Page 7 ---
Page 5 of 15

f) The outstanding balance of the issued PI shall be reported separately as “unearned revenue from
closed PI” in “current liability” segment of the issuer’s financial statement.
g) Issuer shall not use the word “wallet” to represent the closed PI.

4. Application for approval:
a) Eligible entities shall apply to Payment System Department, Bangladesh Bank with required
documents mentioned in sub-clause (b).
b) The required documents shall include but not limited to
1. Certificate of incorporation and registered mailing address
2. Audited financial statements of last financial year
3. A certificate from auditor citing eligibility of the entity as per these guidelines
4. Net worth certificate of last financial year
5. Bank solvency certificate of the applicant
6. A list of saleable goods and services and location of the outlets.

5. Approval from Bangladesh Bank:
a) A committee headed by Director, PSD of Bangladesh Bank shall scrutinize the applications.
b) The committee may ask for additional documents regarding financial strength of the applicant.
c) The committee may also recommend for an aggregate outstanding limit of PI for an applicant.
The recommended limit shall not exceed the maximum limit entitled for closed PI.
d) Bangladesh Bank shall have the sole authority for approval of such application.

6. Restrictions on uses of closed PI:
a) Closed PI can only be used for purchasing goods and services from the PI issuer.
b) Each PI shall be used at once to its full face value. Issuer shall not compel customer for fractional
use of the PI.
c) Customer shall have the right to pay the issuer in combination of PI(s) and other payment
instrument.
d) Closed PI shall only be used for merchant payment. Inter-PI balance transfer is not permissible.
e) Converting closed PI value to BDT, by any means e.g. Cash-out, Bank Transfer, ATM
withdrawal, is not permissible.
f) Converting closed PI value to any other virtual currency or purchasing currency like value, e.g.
Virtual Diamonds, Virtual Gold, MR Points, Coins, Gems etc. for the purpose of future purchases
is not permissible.
g) Closed PI shall not be used for purchasing or subscribing illegal digital contents, online gambling,
betting, gaming etc.

7. PI authentication:
a) The PI must have adequate security features e.g. identical plastic card or paper or unique number
or BAR/QR code or issued against email ID or mobile/NID number etc; so that buyer can check
the authenticity of the PI.
b) The Issuer may enforce additional layers of authentication e.g. Password or PIN or OTP or
Electronic identification or biometric identification etc.
c) The Issuer shall have an online arrangement for the buyers to check the authenticity of the PI.

--- Page 8 ---
Page 6 of 15


8. Selling points of closed PI:
Closed PI may be sold in the designated outlets and website of the PI issuer and, or through third
party outlets or websites.


9. Customer’s risk awareness:
a) Issuers of closed PI are not directly regulated by Bangladesh Bank. These PIs are not backed by
Trust Fund and are subject to the default risk of the issuer.
b) Customers should be aware of the possible default risk of these PIs.
c) Customers should verify company reputation, business tenure, possession, customer review etc.
before buying closed PI to minimize possible default risk.
d) Customers should not buy these PIs for investment purposes and for long holding.
e) Issuer shall reveal all “Terms and conditions” to the buyer during the sale of PI digitally or
manually.

10. Liability of the issuer:
a) Issuer shall be solely responsible for settling liability arising from outstanding PI.
b) Outstanding PI is a part of the current liability of the issuer. In case of liquidation of the issuer,
outstanding PI shall be settled as per liquidation rules of the Company Act, 1994.

11. Buyer identification:
a) Closed PI can be issued in favor of individuals or legal entities within the country.
b) The issuer shall record name and mobile number of the individual buyer purchasing PIs.
c) In case of corporate buyer, the issuer shall take a purchase order in official pad signed by
authorized person of the corporate while selling the PI.

12. Face value:
a) The face value of a closed PI shall be the value inscribed on the PI in BDT that the buyer shall be
entitled to purchase from the issuer using the PI.
b) All the limits described in these guidelines and outstanding liability of the issuer for closed PI
shall be computed in Face Value.

13. Limit for issuer:
a) The aggregate outstanding value of closed PI of an issuer, at any point of time, shall be limited to
a maximum of 20% of its audited net worth of immediate previous financial year or BDT 25
(Twenty five) crores which one is lower.

Net Worth = Total Asset – Total Liability
(Annexure-A can be followed for Net Worth computation)

b) The maximum face value of a closed PI shall be BDT 10,000/- (Taka ten thousand only).

14. Individual and corporate limits:
a) The individual holding limit of closed PI of single issuer shall be BDT 100,000/- (Taka one lac
only).

--- Page 9 ---
Page 7 of 15

b) The corporate holding limit of closed PI of single issuer shall be BDT 20,00,000/- (Taka twenty
lac only).

15. Expiry of closed PI:
a) Closed PI should have maximum expiry of one year.
b) The issuer shall inscribe the expiry date and Face Value on the PI.
c) In case of issuing multiple closed PI, each PI shall be treated separately.
d) The issuer should send an SMS and, or email notification or application/website notification to
the buyer prior 15 (Fifteen) days of expiry.
e) Issuer may extend the expiry period upon request from the buyer/ bearer to maximum 1 (One)
year from the first expiry date of the PI.
f) Buyer/ bearer shall not have any claim on the issuer after the expiry of the PI. Issuer shall take
such undertaking from the buyer of the PI in the “Terms and conditions” during sale.

16. Provisions for expired PI:
a) Issuer shall hold the selling amount of PI for 1 (One) year from the date of first expiry of the PI.
b) Issuer shall prepare a list of expired PIs those satisfy the condition of 16(a) based on 31
December of each year; and within April of the following year, issuer shall deposit the selling
amount of expired PIs to Bangladesh Bank for the purpose of depositing to Government account.
c) Issuer shall deposit the aforesaid amount with a Pay Order in favor of Executive Director,
Motijheel Office, Bangladesh Bank through a forwarding letter and prepared list of the expired
PIs; and shall submit a copy to Payment Systems Department of Bangladesh Bank.
d) Motijheel Office, Bangladesh Bank shall deposit the amount received from the issuers for expired
PIs to Government account by June of the same year and shall send a notification of deposit to
Payment Systems Department for information; and the PI issuer shall be notified accordingly.

17. Discount:
Issuer shall not offer more than 20% discount on the face value of the closed PI.

18. Dispute resolution:
a) The issuer of closed PI shall have an online arrangement or call centre for receiving customer
complaints.
b) The issuer shall have a standard procedure for dispute resolution.
c) The issuer shall ensure proper disclosure of “Terms and Conditions” and dispute resolution
process.
d) In a case of violation of “Terms and conditions” and non-agreement in the dispute resolution
process, each party (Buyer or Seller) shall have the right to seek remedy under applicable law.

19. Reporting requirement:
a) The PI issuer shall submit a certificate attested by the audit firm assigned for its financial audit
citing compliance of these guidelines for issuing PI to Payment Systems Department of
Bangladesh Bank within 3 (three) months from end of the financial year.
b) The certificate shall also contain total amount of issued closed PI, total amount collected by
selling PI, discounted amount, total redemption amount, total outstanding amount and company’
net worth.
c) The issuer shall submit a monthly report according to the format given in Annexure-B.
Bangladesh Bank may update the format from time to time.

--- Page 10 ---
Page 8 of 15


20. Supervision and penalty:
a) Bangladesh Bank may conduct special inspection to ensure proper compliance of these
guidelines.
b) Bangladesh Bank, if finds any irregularities in the function of the issuer, or deems necessary to
protect customer interest,
(i) shall have the right to cancel the approval for issuing such PI at any stage;
(ii) may direct an issuer to buy back the outstanding PI within a particular period; and
(iii) may request the related Government/ Law Enforcement agencies to take lawful action against
the issuer.
c) If an issuer of PI fails to supply promised products/services in exchange of the PI, the customer
shall have the right to get remedy under The Consumers’ Right Protection Act, 2009.
d) Government agencies, responsible for regulating issuer’s financial affairs and for protecting
customers’ right, may also ensure the compliance of these guidelines by the issuer and buyer for
the purpose of customer protection.

--- Page 11 ---
Page 9 of 15

Chapter-2
Semi-closed Prepaid Instrument (PI)

21. Definition(Semi-closed PI):
A semi-closed PI, issued under these guidelines, is an instrument that represents a stored value in
BDT acquired in exchange of money that enables the bearer/ person to make payments for goods and
services from a group of sellers registered by the Issuer.
22. Eligibilities for issuing semi-closed PI:
a) A legal entity, registered under Company Act, 1994 and that has agreements with a group of
sellers regarding acceptance of its PI, and satisfies the conditions of these guidelines shall be
eligible for issuing semi-closed PI.
b) The entity should have business activity in Bangladesh for minimum 5 (Five) years.
c) The entity shall have the audited financial statements for previous 5 (Five) years.
d) The entity shall have a minimum paid-up capital of BDT 5 (Five) crores.

23. Issuance of semi-closed PI:
a) The eligible entities intending to issue semi-closed PI shall take approval from Bangladesh Bank
for issuing such PI.
b) Semi-closed PI can be issued in physical or digital forms.
c) Semi-closed PI shall not be reloadable.
d) Issuer may issue and sell multiple types of semi-closed PIs.
e) Semi-closed PI shall be activated within maximum 24 hours of the issuance.
f) The outstanding balance of the issued PI shall be reported separately as “unearned revenue from
semi-closed PI” in “current liability” segment of the issuer’s financial statement.
g) Issuer shall not use the word “wallet” to represent the semi-closed PI.

24. Application for approval:
a) Eligible entities shall apply to Payment System Department, Bangladesh Bank with required
documents mentioned in sub-clause (b).
b) The required documents shall include but not limited to
1. Certificate of incorporation and registered mailing address
2. Audited financial statements of last financial year
3. A certificate from auditor citing eligibility of the entity as per these guidelines
4. Net worth certificate of last financial year
5. Bank solvency certificate of the applicant
6. Outstanding PI status in current year (If applicable)
7. A form of undertaking by at least 10 (Ten) sellers regarding acceptance of the PI

--- Page 12 ---
Page 10 of 15

25. Approval from Bangladesh Bank:
a) A committee headed by Director, PSD of Bangladesh Bank shall scrutinize the applications.
b) The committee may ask for additional documents regarding financial strength of the applicant.
c) The committee may also recommend for an aggregate outstanding limit of PI for an applicant.
The recommended limit shall not exceed the maximum limit entitled for semi-closed PI.
d) Bangladesh Bank shall have the sole authority for approval of such application.

26. Restrictions on uses of semi-closed PI:
a) Semi-closed PI can only be used for purchasing goods and services from registered (by
agreement) sellers of the PI issuer.
b) Each PI shall be used at once to its full face value. Issuer shall not compel customer for fractional
use of the PI.
c) Customer shall have the right to pay the sellers in combination of PI(s) and other payment
instrument.
d) Semi-closed PI shall only be used for merchant payment. Inter-PI balance transfer is not
permissible.
e) Converting semi-closed PI value to BDT, by any means e.g. Cash-out, Bank Transfer, ATM
withdrawal, is not permissible.
f) Converting semi-closed PI value to any other virtual currency or purchasing currency like value,
e.g. Virtual Diamonds, Virtual Gold, MR Points, Coins, Gems, for the purpose of future
purchases is not permissible.
g) Semi-closed PI shall not be used for purchasing or subscribing illegal digital contents, online
gambling, betting, gaming etc.

27. PI authentication:
a) The PI must have adequate security features e.g. identical plastic card or paper or unique number
or BAR/QR code or issued against email ID or mobile/NID number etc; so that buyer can check
the authenticity of the PI.
b) The Issuer may enforce additional layers of authentication e.g. Password or PIN or OTP or
Electronic identification or biometric identification etc.
c) The Issuer shall have an online arrangement for the buyers to check the authenticity of the PI.

28. Selling points of semi-closed PI:
Semi-closed PI may be sold in the designated outlets and website of the PI issuer or through third
party outlets or websites.

29. Customer’s risk awareness:
a) Semi-closed PIs are not backed by Trust Fund; and are subject to the default risk of the issuer.
b) Customers should be aware of the possible default risk of these PIs.
c) Customers should verify company reputation, business tenure, possession, customer review etc.
before buying semi-closed PI to minimize possible default risk.
d) Customers should not buy these PI for investment purposes and for long holding.
e) Issuer shall reveal all terms and conditions to the buyer during the sale of such PI digitally or
manually.

--- Page 13 ---
Page 11 of 15


30. Acceptability of semi-closed PI:
a) Issuer shall publish the list of sellers obliged by contract to accept its PI and update the list if any
changes.
b) The sellers giving undertaking regarding acceptance of the PI by contract shall be responsible for
accepting the PI indiscriminately.
c) In an event of non-acceptance of the PI by the sellers, issuer shall be solely responsible for
settling liability arising from outstanding PI. Moreover, issuer shall be liable for possible
customer harassment, and should compensate the customer accordingly.
d) Issuer should take legal action against the sellers for violating the undertaking regarding
acceptance of the PI.

31. Liability of the issuer:
a) Outstanding PI is a part of the current liability of the issuer.
b) If an issuer becomes insolvent, sellers may refuse to accept the PI. In such a scenario, the bearer/
buyer of the PI shall have the right to take legal action against the issuer for establishing his/her
claim on the issuer; however, the bearer/ buyer shall not force the sellers to accept the PI.
c) In case of liquidation of the issuer, outstanding PI shall be settled as per liquidation rules of the
Company Act, 1994.

32. Buyer identification:
a) Semi-closed PI can be issued in favor of individuals or legal entities within the country.
b) The issuer shall record name and mobile number of the individual buyer purchasing PIs.
c) In case of corporate buyer, the issuer shall take a purchase order in official pad signed by
authorized person of the corporate while selling the PI.

33. Face value:
a) The face value of a semi-closed PI shall be the value inscribed on the PI in BDT that the buyer
shall be entitled to purchase using the PI.
b) All the limits described in these guidelines and outstanding liability of the issuer for semi-closed
PI shall be computed in Face Value.

34. Limit for issuer:
a) The aggregate outstanding value of semi-closed PI of an issuer, at any point of time, shall be
limited to a maximum of 20% of its audited net worth of immediate previous financial year or
BDT 25 (Twenty five) Crore which one is lower. The approval committee shall have the authority
to decrease the aforesaid limit considering financial strength of the applicant.

Net Worth = Total Asset – Total Liability
(Annexure-A can be followed for Net Worth computation)

b) The maximum face value of a semi-closed PI shall be BDT 10,000/- (BDT ten thousand only).

--- Page 14 ---
Page 12 of 15


35. Individual and corporate limits:
a) The individual holding limit of semi-closed PI of single issuer shall be BDT 100,000/- (Taka one
lac only).
b) The corporate holding limit of semi-closed PI of single issuer shall be BDT 20,00,000/- (Taka
twenty lac only).

36. Expiry of semi-closed PI:
a) Semi-closed PI should have maximum expiry of one year.
b) The issuer shall inscribe the expiry date and Face Value on the PI.
c) In case of issuing multiple semi-closed PI, each PI shall be treated separately.
d) The issuer should send an SMS and, or email or application/website notification to the customer
prior 15 (Fifteen) days of expiry.
e) Issuer may extend the expiry period upon request from the buyer/ bearer to maximum 1 (One)
year from the first expiry date of the PI.
f) Buyer shall not have any claim on the issuer after the expiry of the PI. Issuer shall take such
undertaking from the buyer of the PI in “terms and condition” during sale.

37. Provisions for expired PI:
a) Issuer shall hold the selling amount of PI for 1 (One) year from the date of first expiry of the PI.
b) Issuer shall prepare a list of expired PIs those satisfy the condition of 37(a) based on 31
December of each year; and within April of the following year, issuer shall deposit the selling
amount of the expired PIs to Bangladesh Bank for the purpose of depositing to Government
account.
c) Issuer shall deposit the aforesaid amount with a Pay Order in favor of Executive Director,
Motijheel Office, Bangladesh Bank through a forwarding letter and prepared list of the expired
PIs; and shall submit a copy to Payment Systems Department of Bangladesh Bank.
d) Motijheel Office, Bangladesh Bank shall deposit the amount received from the issuers for expired
PIs to Government account by June of the same year and shall send a notification of deposit to
Payment Systems Department for information; and the issuer shall be notified accordingly.

38. Discount:
Issuer shall not offer more than 20% discount on the face value of the semi-closed PI.

39. Dispute resolution:
a) The issuer of semi-closed PI shall have an online arrangement or call centre for receiving
customer complaints.
b) The issuer shall have a standard procedure for dispute resolution.
c) The issuer shall ensure proper disclosure of “Terms and Conditions” and dispute resolution
process.
d) In a case of violation of “Terms and conditions” and non-agreement in the dispute resolution
process, each party (Buyer or seller) shall have the right to seek remedy under applicable law.

--- Page 15 ---
Page 13 of 15



40. Reporting requirement:
a) The PI issuer shall submit a certificate attested by the audit firm assigned for its financial audit
citing compliance of these guidelines for issuing PI to Payment Systems Department of
Bangladesh Bank within 3 (three) months from the end of the financial year.
b) The certificate shall also contain total amount of issued semi-closed PI, total amount collected by
selling those PI, discounted amount, total redemption amount, total outstanding amount and
company’ net worth.
c) The issuer shall submit a monthly report according to the format given in Annexure-B.
Bangladesh Bank may update the format from time to time.

41. Supervision and penalty:
a) Bangladesh Bank may conduct special inspection to ensure proper compliance of these
guidelines.
b) Bangladesh Bank, if finds any irregularities in the function of the issuer, or deems necessary to
protect customer interest,
(i) shall have the right to cancel the approval for issuing such PI at any stage;
(ii) may direct an issuer to buy back the outstanding PI within a particular period; and
(iii) may request the related Government/ Law Enforcement agencies to take lawful action against
the issuer.
c) If an issuer of PI fails to supply promised products/services in exchange of the PI, the customer
shall have the right to get remedy under The Consumers’ Right Protection Act, 2009.
d) Government agencies, responsible for regulating issuer’s financial affairs and for protecting
customers’ right, may also ensure compliance of these guidelines by the issuer and buyer.

--- Page 16 ---
Page 14 of 15

Annexure-A
Computation of net-worth
Particulars
Amount in BDT
Share Capital (Common Share)



Add:

Preferred share (Compulsorily convertible)

Share Premium (Paid-in Capital)

Reserves

Retained Earnings

Other Equity Items (if any)



Less:

Revaluation Reserve

Revaluation Gain (Any unrealized revaluation gain shown in
Income Statement)

Accumulated Losses

Book Value of Intangible Assets

Deferred Revenue



Net-worth as on (date)

--- Page 17 ---
Page 15 of 15

Annexure-B
Reporting Format for PI Issuers
Serial
Particulars
Amount in
BDT/Numbers/etc.
Reporting Month

Number of types/categories of PI

Number of PI issued during the reporting month

Amount of PI issued during the reporting month

Number of PI redeemed during the reporting month

Amount of PI redeemed during the reporting month

Number of unredeemed PI at the end of the previous month

Amount of unredeemed PI at the end of the previous month

Total number of unredeemed PI at the end of the reporting month
(3+7-5)

10
Total amount of unredeemed PI at the end of the reporting month
(4+8-6)

11
Total number of expired PI at the end of the reporting month

12
Total amount of expired PI at the end of the reporting month

13
Change in percentage of total number of PI issued during reporting
month compared to that of previous month

14
Change in percentage of total amount of PI issued during reporting
month compared to that of previous month


------------End-----------