--- Page 1 ---
FOREIGN EXCHANGE POLICY DEPARTMENT
BANGLAESH BANK
HEAD OFFICE
DHAKA

F.E CIRCULAR NO-11





DATE : 20/12/2004


All Authorized Dealers in Foreign Exchange
in Bangladesh.


Dear Sirs,

ADVANCE PAYMENT AGAINST IMPORTS

Please refer to paragraph 24, chapter 15 of the "Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions,
1996 (GFET), Volume-1" on the captioned subject.
02. Effective from 1st January 2005, the existing text of paragraph 24, chapter 15 of GFET, Vol-1
shall be substituted as under:
“24(i). Advance remittance for permissible imports of goods and services into Bangladesh may be
effected by the Authorized Dealers without prior approval of the Bangladesh Bank, against applications
from the importers submitted with signed undertaking in the revised format of Appendix 5/12(enclosed),
provided that:
the purchase contract with supplier specifically requires advance payment,
the supplier furnishes repayment guarantee acceptable to the Authorized Dealer, from a bank
abroad, to be invoked for refund of the amount paid in advance in the event of the supplier’s
default in delivering the goods or services as per contract. Such guarantee need not however be
insisted upon in cases of advance payments up to USD2500 for import of books, journals or life
savings medicines.

(ii) Requests for advance remittance where the suppliers are unwilling or unable to furnish the repayment
bank guarantee referred to at para 24(i)(b) may be forwarded by the Authorized Dealers, along with their
recommendations, for specific decision of the Bangladesh Bank on merit of each case.

(iii) Authorized Dealers shall report to the Bangladesh Bank the cases where the goods/ services against
advance payments are not received in Bangladesh within due time.”

03.Please bring these instructions to the notice of all concerned; meanwhile please acknowledge receipt of
this circular.









Yours faithfully,

Enclosure:01(one) page.








(Khandaker Khalidur Rahman)








Deputy General Manager









Phone: 7120375

--- Page 2 ---
See Chapter 15
Para 24

APP. 5
12

BANGLADESH BANK
FOREIGN EXCHANGE POLICY DEPARTMENT




FORM OF UNDERTAKING

(To be furnished by the importer for making advance remittances for permissible imports of goods
and services).

In consideration of Bangladesh Bank permitting me/us an advance remittance of

to

I/We hereby undertake that the amount
so remitted by me/us will be used solely for the purpose of payment for the goods/services described
below to be imported into Bangladesh from
in
accordance
with
the
regulations in force regarding such imports. I /We declare that the goods/ services will be so imported by
me/us on or about

and I/We undertake to produce to the Bangladesh Bank
documentary evidence in respect of goods/ services so imported including the Exchange Control Copy of
the Customs Bill of Entry for goods and suppliers invoice in original. I/We further declare that the amount
paid by me/us in advance will be deducted from the invoice value of the goods (CFR)/ services imported
and that the deduction will be shown on the invoice.

Invoice value
Description
Country of
origin
Particulars of L.C.
Authorisation
Form
Name and address
of the supplier
Goods
Services
Goods
Services
Goods
Services
Goods
Services












Signature and Stamp of the
Importer



Name of the Importer

Address

Registration Number with CCI & E


Date……………………..
Signature and Stamp of the
Authorised Dealer