--- Page 1 ---
Translated from Bangla
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka.
Web site: www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

FE Circular No.10





Date: 03 August, 2009

All Authorized Dealers of
Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh


Dear Sirs,
Release of foreign exchange on current account transactions

Authorized Dealers (ADs) are allowed to effect remittance on current account transactions as
specified in Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions (GFET), Vol-1 (2009).
To bring further liberalization, it has now been decided to allow ADs in releasing foreign
exchange for the following transactions:

1. Remittance for registration/participation fee for training/seminar/workshop abroad:


Chapter 11, paragragh 14 of GFET-2009 permits ADs to release foreign exchange on
account of registration/participation fees of the Officials of Govt., employees of banks and
financial institutions operating in Bangladesh, Faculty Members of nationally recognized banking
training institutions for attending training/seminar/workshop abroad. From now, ADs may release
foreign
exchange
on
account
of
registration/participation
fees
for
attending
training/seminar/workshop abroad to the organizing institutions abroad on behalf of
employees/officials of companies/firms/institutes/NGOs operating in Bangladesh in compliance
with the following instructions :

a) the invitation letter is received in the name of applicant from the organizing institution;
b) the tour must be approved by the employer;
c) the fee as indicated in invoice/demand note is reasonable;
d) the programme of training/seminar/workshop is appropriate for the intending
employee/official based on his/her job specification;
e) the programme of training/seminar/workshop is financed out of budgetary allocation of the
institutions;
f) request for remittance of more than one time for attending training/seminar/workshop in a
year favouring a single person is to be justified;
g) request letter to remit the fee from the employer is received;
h) registration certificate of the concerned institutions.

ADs shall forward one full set of all papers including copy of TM Form to Foreign Exchange
Operation Department of head office or the concerned area office of the Bangladesh Bank with the
usual monthly return.

Cont'd.........02

--- Page 2 ---
-02-
2. Remittance for study abroad:


ADs are allowed to release foreign exchange for admission and study by Bangladesh
nationals in regular courses such as undergraduate, post graduate & professional
diploma/certificate courses in institutions abroad as per paragraph 10, chapter 11 of GFET-2009
(Vol-1). Sometimes students get themselves admitted into the foreign institutions without taking
away foreign currency from the Bangladesh source. For meeting the educational expenses of the
following year/semester ADs apply to Bangladesh Bank for approval. ADs also apply for prior
approval to Bangldesh Bank for releasing foreign exchange in cases of changing institution,
changing subject and opening of student file for new course by the students. In these cases, from
now ADs may allow the remittances on being satisfied after scrutiny of following documents and in
compliance with above mentioned paragraph:


a) Release of foreign exchange for study of students studying abroad.

(1) reasonable explanation of reasons for application to release foreign currency for study
abroad after leaving the country;
(2) required papers of admission executed earlier ;
(3) academic results of previous semesters;
(4) sources and amount of the expenses incurred earlier.


b) Change of institution:
(1) reasonable explanation by the applicant for the change;
(2) the new institute has agreed to accept the credits earned in the present institution.


c) Change of subject:


(1) reasonable explanation by the applicant for the change.


d) Opening of student file for new course:

(1) in compliance with the prevailing instructions on release of foreign exchange.


3. Remittance against surplus earning of local agent of foreign railway company:

ADs may release foreign exchange on behalf of local agent of foreign railway company without
prior permission from Bangladesh Bank. local agent of foreign railway company having permission
from Bangladesh Bank shall submit monthly statements to the AD for the purpose of remittance of
surplus earnings to head office/principal abroad. The monthly statement, certified by the auditor of
the company, and its supporting documents should contain information relating to each collection in
Bangladesh against sales of tickets, amount











Cont'd.........03

--- Page 3 ---
-03-

of commission and the amount payable to the principal on account of charges. The surplus earnings
shall be determined by deducting from gross collections (i) the local agent's commission, (ii) taxes
payable on gross collections as applicable (iii) audit fees and other expenses. Remittance
applications should also be accompanied by invoices raised by head office/principal abroad for the
claimed amount and an undertaking from the applicant to the effect that in the event of detection, on
post facto scrutiny, of any excess remittance, the excess amount will be repatriated/adjusted from
subsequent remittable amount.


Before taking up for processing a remittance application, the AD shall check whether the
applicant company has valid approval (with upto date renewal) from Bangladesh Bank under Section
18A of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 and shall satisfy themselves that the terms and
conditions of the permission letter of Bangladesh Bank have been duly fulfilled. Within 15 days of
effecting the remittance, the AD will forward one full set of application alongwith its supporting
documents to the Foreign Exchange Operation Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka
for post facto checking. Documents shall be attached with relative Form TM while reporting the
remittance to FEOD/ the area office of Bangladesh Bank in the monthly summary statement/returns.

5. Remittance of legal expenses:


In case of filing and contesting suits in abroad by banks, prior approval of Bangladesh Bank
is required for releasing foreign exchange. Moreover Bangladesh Bank approval is required
separately for effecting every remittance/transaction towards legal cost of the same suit. From now
ADs may continue to effect remittance of subsequent legal fees of the suit for which first time
approval from Bangladesh Bank has been received. In this context, with the application for
according first time approval, AD should submit approval of Board of Directors for contesting the
suit and a certificate by an expert lawyer certifying that contesting the suit is mandatory and there is
a possibility of getting judgment in favour of bank.

These instructions will be effective immediately. Please bring it to the notice of all concerned
and acknowledge receipt of it.

Yours faithfully,


sd.
(Khandaker Abdus Salim)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 7120375