--- Page 1 ---
Foreign Exchange Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
www. bangladeshbank.org.bd

FE Circular No. 09








Date: 30 July, 2009
All Authorized Dealers and licensed Money Changers
of Foreign Exchange in Bangladesh
Dear Sirs,
Regarding Issuance and Distribution of Volume-1 of Guidelines for Foreign Exchange
Transactions, 2009 successor to the Guidelines for Foreign Exchange Transactions, 1996.
Bangladesh Bank, under the purview of section 20(3) of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (Act
VII of 1947) issues FE Circulars and Circular Letters from time to time wherein statutory regulations and
instructions to be followed by the Authorized Dealers and their constituents, Money Changers in transactions
relating to foreign exchange are laid down. According to this empowerment, Volume-1 of Guidelines for Foreign
Exchange Transactions, 2009 (successor to 1996 version) in English containing subject matter of FE Circulars
and Circular Letters issued upto May 31, 2009 has been issued for being followed by all related parties.
Instructions laid in this compilation will be considered as the brief version of the FE Circulars and Circular
Letters issued upto May 31, 2009. The printed version of the guidelines will be obtainable from Foreign Exchange
Policy Department, Bangladesh Bank against submission of written application. The copy of the same may be
downloaded also from Bangladesh Bank website (www.bangladeshbank.org.bd).

02. Since printing of volume 2 of the guidelines is still under process, recipients of the Volume-1 will get
it free of cost later on. Moreover, submission of returns as per forms prescribed in Volume-2 of Guidelines for
Foreign Exchange Transactions, 1996 and related FE Circulars and Circular Letters issued after 31 December,
1996 will have to be continued until publication of the new version of Volume-2.

03. Price of the guidelines has been decided to be Tk. 500 (Five hundred taka only). Authorized Dealer
banks will submit application along with account payee cheque of required amount in favor of Bangladesh Bank
for supplying of the guidelines (along with application of the customers if to be used by them). For supplying of
limited number of sets, payment may be made in cash during receiving of delivery.
Please acknowledge receipt and bring the contents of this Circular to the notice of all concerned.

Yours faithfully,
Signed/-
(Khondoker Abdus Selim)
Deputy General Manager
Phone: 7120375
Translated