--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 of 5
Website: www.bangladesh-bank.org
www.bangladeshbank.org.bd

Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka
September 23, 2008
BRPD Circular No. 07 Date:-------------------------
Ashwin 08, 1415
Chief Executives
All Scheduled Banks in Bangladesh

Dear Sir,
Guidelines for recognition of eligible
External Credit Assessment Institutions (ECAIs)

You are aware that Risk Based Capital Adequacy (Basel I) has been introduced in
Bangladesh since 1996 vide BRPD Circular number 01 dated January 08, 1996. To make the
capital maintenance more risk sensitive as well as to make the banking industry more shock
absorbent and stable, Risk Based Capital Adequacy framework (Basel II) will be implemented
in Bangladesh from January 2009. For this a National Steering Committee headed by Deputy
Governor of Bangladesh Bank (BB) and the members comprising of CEO/MD of some
commercial banks and representative from Institute of Chartered Accountants of Bangladesh
(ICAB) has been working in this regard since July, 2005. In addition, a Coordination
Committee on Basel II implementation headed by Executive Director and member comprising
some officials of BB, commercial banks and representative from Bangladesh Institute of Bank
Management (BIBM) is providing supportive efforts to the National Steering Committee.
Furthermore, to assess the supervisory and regulatory strength and operational
independence of BB, a self audit on compliance with Basel Core Principles (BCP) for effective
banking supervision was made in October 2006. Afterwards, to know the banks' awareness and
preparedness and their view on the alternative approaches for calculating Minimum Capital
Requirement (MCR), a Quantitative Impact Study (QIS) was conducted in April-May 2007.
Both the study showed that banks have favorable environment for Basel II implementation in
Bangladesh. The QIS findings suggested for initial Basel II implementation with the following
specific approaches:
A) Standardized Approach for calculating Risk Weighted Assets (RWA) against Credit
Risk
B) Standardized (Rule Based) Approach for calculating RWA against Market Risk
C) Basic Indicator Approach for calculating RWA against Operational Risk

To this end, an Action Plan/ Roadmap has been issued vide BRPD Circular No. 14 dated
December 30, 2007.
Contd. page/2

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 of 5



Under the Standardized Approach of the Risk Based Capital Adequacy framework
(Basel II), credit rating is to be determined on the basis of risk profile assessed by the External
Credit Assessment Institutions (ECAIs) duly recognized by BB. All scheduled banks will be
required to nominate recognized ECAI for their own as well as their counterparty credit rating.
In this perspective, a set of guidelines on recognition of the eligible ECAI is issued and
forwarded herewith for information. BB will complete the recognition process soon as and
when application will be obtained from the interested credit rating agencies.

The guideline is also accessible at the BB website.

Please acknowledge receipt.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-

(Md. Jahangir Alam)
General Manager
Phone: 7117825
Enclosure: A set of guidelines (11 pages).

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 of 5

Banking Regulation & Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
Dhaka


Guidelines for Recognition of
eligible External Credit Assessment Institutions (ECAIs)


External Credit Assessment Institutions (ECAIs) duly recognized by Bangladesh Bank
(BB) will be engaged in credit risk assessment under the Standardized Approach of the Risk
Based Capital Adequacy framework (Basel II). On the basis of that assessment, risk weight will
be mapped with the credit rating category and risk weighted assets (RWA) to be determined for
calculating the capital requirement of banks against credit risk. The criteria of ECAI
recognition and mapping process of risk weight (RW) has been developed in line with the
“International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards” (Basel II) issued
by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) in June 2006.

1. Recognition criteria

ECAIs that produce credit assessments of sufficiently high quality, uniformity and potency to
be used by banks shall be eligible for recognition by BB for regulatory capital purpose. The
following six criteria will be considered in determining the eligibility of an ECAI:

A) Objectivity:

The methodology for assigning credit assessments must be rigorous, systematic, and subject to
validation based on historical experience. Moreover, assessments must be subject to ongoing
review and responsive to changes in financial condition of the concerned entity. An assessment
methodology for each market segment, including rigorous back-testing, must have been
established for at least one year and preferably three years.

B) Independence:

An ECAI should be independent and free from political, social or economic pressure that may
influence the rating. The assessment process should also be free from any such constraints that
could arise in situations where the composition of the board of directors or the shareholder
structure and the officials of the assessment team of the ECAIs may be seen as creating a
conflict of interest.

C) International access / Transparency:

The individual assessment should be available to both domestic and foreign institutions with
legitimate interests, and at equivalent terms. In addition, the rating methodology used by the
ECAI should be publicly available.

D) Disclosure:

An ECAI should disclose its assessment methodologies, notch/notation to be used, definition of
default rating category, the meaning of each rating, and its time horizon, actual default rates
experienced in each assessment category; and the transitions of the assessment, e.g. the
likelihood of AA ratings becoming A over time.

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 5
E) Resources:

An ECAI should have sufficient resources to carry out high quality credit assessments. These
resources should allow for substantial on going contact with senior and operational level
executives within the entities assessed in order to add value to the credit assessments. Such
assessment methodologies should be based on both qualitative and quantitative approaches.

F) Credibility:

In addition to the above criteria, the reliance on an ECAI’s credit assessments by independent
parties (investors, insurers, trading partners) shall be evidences of the credibility of the
assessments of an ECAI. The credibility of an ECAI is also underpinned by the existence of
effective internal control to prevent the misuse of confidential information.

2. Mapping process

2.1 BB will assign risk weight to an eligible ECAI’s rating categories i.e. deciding which rating
categories correspond to which risk-weights. BB will evaluate each credit rating category of an
eligible ECAI which will be mapped with the numerals 1 to 6, with 1 being the best and 6 being
the worst and includes 'Default Rating Category'*. Each "short term credit rating category"**
will be evaluated and mapped with category S1 to S4, with S1 being the best. BB will assign
risk weight on the basis of evaluation of variety of qualitative and quantitative factors relate to
ECAI's rating category.

2.2 BB will consider a variety of qualitative and quantitative factors to differentiate between
the relative degrees of risk expressed by each rating category. Both quantitative and qualitative
parameters may help to promote a more consistent mapping of rating categories into the
assigned risk-weights.

a) Quantitative factors:

i) BB will evaluate the consistency of an ECAI's rating category (Notch/Notation)
through analysis of Cumulative Default Rate (CDR). CDR is the measure of movement of a
rating category into 'Default Rating Category '* during a time period.
The following two measures of CDR may be considered in this regard:
• Ten-year average of the three-year CDR for evaluating the long-run default
experience; and
• Most recent three-year CDR for evaluating the short-run default experience.

ii) The transition of individual notch/notation towards default rating category observed
in a particular ECAI rating category will be compared to the standards available domestically/
regionally/ internationally.

* This rating is applicable for those counterparties who are in default position. A default is considered to have
occurred with regard to a particular obligor when either or both of the two following events have taken place.
• The bank considers that the obligor is unlikely to pay its credit obligations to the banking company or syndicate
banking group, without recourse by the bank to actions such as realizing security (if held).
• The obligor is past due for more than 90 days or more as defined by BB.

** Short-term ratings may only be used for short-term claims against banks and corporate counterparties.

--- Page 5 ---
Page 5 of 5
iii) The long-run transition towards default category of the ECAI ratings will be
compared with the reference values of CDRs available domestically/regionally/internationally.
In this connection, internationally accepted long-run reference values are stated below for
information:


Long-run “reference” three-year CDRs*
S&P assessment
AAA-AA
BBB
BB
Moody’s
Aaa-Aa
Baa
Ba
20-year average of three year CDR
0.10%
0.25%
1.00%
7.50%
20.00%

*Ref. Table-2 Annexure-2 of International Convergence of Capital measurement and Capital standards, published by BCBS (June 2006)

iv) BB will use two benchmark CDRs namely “monitoring” level CDR and a “trigger”
level CDR in interpreting whether a CDR falls within an acceptable range for a rating category
to qualify for a particular risk-weight. BB will adopt the two benchmarks of CDR standard in
line with domestic/regional/international standard. In this connection, Basel Committee
standards are specified in the following table for information:
Three-year CDRs benchmark*
S&P assessment
AAA-AA
BBB
BB
Moody’s
Aaa-Aa
Baa
Ba
Monitoring level
0.8%
1.0%
2.4%
11.0%
28.6%
Trigger level
1.2%
1.3%
3.0%
12.4%
35.0%

*Ref. Table-3 Annexure-2 of International Convergence of Capital measurement and Capital standards, published by BCBS (June 2006)

v) Exceeding the “monitoring” level CDR benchmark implies that a rating agency’s
transition to default rating for a particular notch/ notation is markedly higher than
domestic/regional/international transition experience to default rating. A consultation process
with a relevant ECAI will commence to understand why the default experience appears to be
significantly worse. If the BB determines that the higher default experience is attributable to
weaker standards in assessing credit risk, they would be expected to assign a higher risk
category to ECAIs credit risk assessments.

vi) Exceeding the “trigger” level benchmark implies that transition of an ECAI's
notch/notation towards default rating is considerably above the domestic/regional/international
standards. If the observed three-year CDR exceeds the trigger level in two consecutive years,
the ECAIs rating category shall be degraded.

vii) ECAIs who have only a short record of transition and default data will be required
to provide a projection of the ten-year average of the three-year CDR on the basis of two most
recent CDRs.

viii) Definition of 'Default Rating' has an impact on the assessment of CDR. ECAI will
declare definition of 'default rating' at their website and submit a copy to BB. Subsequently, if
any amendment on the same is made must be reported to BB with due justification thereof.

b) Qualitative factors

Criteria under qualitative factors will be set by BB's working group to assess different
rating methodology and their scoring standard will form the necessary basis of the mapping
process. Quantitative data may be inconclusive for mapping risk weights, in that situation
qualitative criteria may be the only basis of mapping risk weight.

--- Page 6 ---
Page 6 of 5

3. Application process


3.1 Credit Rating Companies (Domestic & International) that are registered under Credit
Rating Companies Rules, 1996 of Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Bangladesh
and meet the eligibility criteria may apply to General Manager, Banking Regulation and Policy
Department, Bangladesh Bank, Head Office, Dhaka for the recognition as an ECAI
(Application Form-A along with information stated in Annexure-1 ).

3.2 ECAIs will categorize their ratings into the following broad asset classes or market
segments:

a) Sovereign (Government, Public Sector Corporations & Autonomous Bodies )
b) Financial Institutions (Banks, Insurances Co., Security firms and other Financial
Institutions)
c) Corporate (other than Government & Financial Institutions)
d) Others (If any to be mentioned specifically)

3.3 A working group of BB will complete recognition process and follow a uniform minimum
standard of the components are stated in annexure-1. They will define any required term(s),
prepare check list and score list where necessary.

4. On-going recognition

Recognition of an ECAI will be reviewed annually until they reach the point where the
robustness of system is assured to BB’s satisfaction. It is expected that an ECAI will continue
to meet the eligible criteria for recognition and its methodologies and credit assessments remain
appropriate over different periods of time and through changes in market conditions:

(a) ECAIs ratings will be reviewed at least annually and may be revised in response to
changes in financial conditions; and their ratings are subject to back-testing on an annual basis.

(b) If any material changes occur that alter a significant number of ratings, ECAIs will
inform BB about the changes promptly (e.g. change of ownership or internal structure and
major deterioration in financial positions etc.). ECAIs will maintain minimum standard of the
rating methodology set by BB from time to time.

(c) BB will review the eligibility of an ECAI on continuous basis. If it comes to BB's
attention that there is a noticeable deterioration in the performance and/or market acceptance of
the ECAI, BB will review the eligibility of the ECAI immediately.

d) BB may withdraw the recognition of an eligible ECAI if it ceases to comply with any
of the recognition criteria. Before taking such decision of derecognizing, BB will first notify
the concerned ECAI mentioning the eligibility criteria which is found as non-compliant. The
ECAI will also be allowed to clarify their position within a reasonable time. After which
appropriate decision in this regard shall be taken.

e) If an ECAI is suspended or their registration is cancelled by SEC under Credit Rating
Companies rules 1996, BB will treat the particular ECAI as derecognized.

--- Page 7 ---
Page 7 of 5
5. Guidelines applicable to Banks regarding nomination of ECAIs

5.1. For the purpose of applying ECAI ratings to derive risk-weights for exposures under the
portfolio of claims on sovereigns, claims on banks, claims on securities firms and claims on
corporate, a bank should satisfy the following steps:

(i) Banks will nominate recognized ECAI for determining credit rating of banking book
exposures and notify BB about the nominated ECAI.

(ii) Banks will use the ratings of the nominated ECAI for each of banking book
portfolio constantly for a reasonable period. If they want to change the ECAI(s) must seek the
consent from BB stating valid ground; and

iii) A client may be counter party of many banks or may change his bank in a particular
year. In such cases, credit rating assigned by any recognized ECAI will be considered as valid
for that year by the bank.

5.2 Banks will require maintaining track record of their counterparty ratings over the years.

5.3 If any bank or a client has reasonable ground sufficient to raise question about ECAIs
assessment of the credit rating, they may inform BB in writing with valid explanation. BB shall
look into the matter and take necessary step(s) as it deem fit.

5.4 Bangladeshi banks, having exposures abroad, may use the ratings assigned by ECAIs
recognized through indirect recognition. Indirect recognition process is that where BB is
satisfied that host country supervisor has recognized an ECAI on the basis of recognition
criteria which are well matched with this guidelines.

5.5 Banks will follow Credit Risk Grading Manual (CRGM) for assessing a borrower and
making decisions of disbursing loans and advances/ investments. CRG may be customized for
internal rating in such a way that can help to derive parameters like probability of default (PD),
exposure at default (EAD) and loss given to default (LGD) which will be required for
determining risk weight under Internal Rating Based (IRB) approach of Basel II.

6. General Instructions:


6.1 The ECAI(s) will disclose credit ratings of related parties quarterly to BB after the
assessment is finalized. All the rating will be supported by declaration (duly signed by CEO)
that the rating is independent and free from conflict of interest. Such statement will be based
upon the declaration made by each member/official related to rating activities.

6.2 The ECAIs should have a unique pricing system for credit rating. They should disclose
their schedule of credit rating fees annually.

6.3 The ECAIs will follow the IOSCO/SEC Code of Conduct Fundamentals published for
Credit Rating Agencies.

--- Page 8 ---
Page 1 of 1
Form – A

FORM OF APPLICATION FOR RECOGNITION
AS AN EXTERNAL CREDIT ASSESSMENT INTITUTION



To
General Manager
Banking Regulation and Policy Department
Bangladesh Bank
Head Office
12th Floor (2nd annex building)
Motijheel,
Dhaka-1000.


Dear Sir,

We hereby apply for recognition as an External Credit Assessment Institution (ECAI). It
is to mention that:

1. We are eligible for assessing credit standing of the Sovereign, Financial Institutions,
Corporate and other clients.

2. We confirm that the credit assessments will be used for risk-weighting purposes
under the Risk Based Capital Adequacy framework (Basel II).

3. Necessary information required for recognition listed as per annexure-1 (enclosed) is
furnished herewith

4. We confirm that all the information outlined in this letter and the enclosed annexure
are true and correct.




Yours Faithfully,

Signature of the Chairman/Managing Director/
Chief Executive Officer/ Executive Director/Director

--- Page 9 ---
Page 1 of 4
List of information to be supported by document(s)

A) Regarding Objectivity
Supported Documents/
Statements required

1. Manuscript of Methodology

- Risk area coverage

- Importance/ Weightage on each risk area
Manuscript of Methodology
will cover at least those
information as mentioned in
the annexure - 1(a) along with
weightage score.


2. Internal Process


- Analysis Team
List of Executives with
qualification and experience

- Rating Committee

List of Members with
qualification and experience

- Internal Verification system
Internally practiced Manual


3. Rating Scale and their sensitivity


- Number of Notches/ Notations to be used for
ratings

- Scoring System for achieving the Notches/
Notation

Demonstration of Alignment with international
ratings of Standard & Poor (S&P)

Statement of Notches/
Notations to be used for each
rating and Scoring system.
Demonstration of
methodology: how it is
aligned with international
ratings of S&P.


4. Validation system

- Off-site analysis

- On-site examination
Brief description on supported
rules, regulation, techniques
of the validation system used
by an ECAI. (Minimum 150
words).





5. Ongoing Review

- Client wise yearly track record of rating

- Solicited Review

- Unsolicited Review
Brief description on Database
Management system which
includes all these components.
(Minimum 100 words).


6. Database Management

- Assessment/disclosure of the depth of default data
available/held by the ECAI

- Transition matrices (Notch/Notation wise)
Brief description on this issue
included in Database
Management system.
(Minimum 100 words).


7. System Back Testing

- Comparative Analysis (three year's comparison)
Brief description on this issue
included in Database
Management system.
(Minimum 75 words).

B) Regarding Independence


1. Registration status with SEC

- Registration No.

- Date of Registration
Copy of Certificate of
Registration


2. Ownership Quality

- Nature of ownership
Memorandum of Association,
Articles of Association and

--- Page 10 ---
Page 2 of 4

- List of major share holders (holding shares over

- Voting power of each share holder
Certificate of Commencement
along with up to date
information.


3. Procedure to ensure Independence

- Executives of analyst team is independent i.e. free
from any political, social or economic pressure that
may influence assessment/rating.

- Rating Committee is independent and free from
any political, social or economic pressure that may
influence assessment/rating.
Letter of undertaking for
providing declaration of team
members regarding activity
which will be independent
and free from conflict of
interest.

- The names, profiles and backgrounds of each
executive within the analyst teams.
Details C.V of each executive
and members of the rating
committee.


4. Board Members are free from influencing rating
activities.

- Board Members careful about influencing rating
function.
Letter of undertakings of
Board Members


5. Solvency of the Company

- Audited Balance Sheet and Income Statement

- Cash flow statement

- Net- worth

- Bank Solvency Certificate
Audited Balance Sheet and
Income Statement, Cash flow
statement for 3 years and
Bank turnover statements for
last 1 year.


6. Schedule of credit assessment fees

- Published/Disclosed list of fees
Published/Disclosed List of
fees to be charged for making
assessment.

C) International Access/Transparency


1. International Exposure

- Accreditation or membership of international/
regional credit rating association

- Evidence of overseas experience
Accreditation or membership
Certificate.
Evidence
of
overseas experience.



2. Accessibility of the ECAI's rating


- Easy availability of credit rating to the public
Published Document

- Website containing track record & transition
matrices of credit rating
Statement
of
Web-site
Address


3. Availability of Assessment Methodology


- Disclosure of assessment methodology to public
Published Document

- Website containing updated assessment
methodology
Description on how to find
out and consult with
methodology placed in Web-
site.


4. Nature of rating

- Disclose whether the rating was Solicited or
Unsolicited
Database Management system
should have these sorts of
declaration.

--- Page 11 ---
Page 3 of 4


D) Disclosure



1. Definition of Default Rating Category

- The rating agency's definition regarding default
rating category and specific definition of 'Default'
Published
Methodology
should include this definition.

The meanings of each rating and how they may be
compared to standards of Moody's and S&P rating
category.
Comparison statement with
the standards of Moody's and
S&P rating category.


2. Actual transition rate towards default rating
(business category wise and notch wise)

- Publish the transition of notches towards default
rating periodically in the websites

3. Disclosure of transition matrices

- Publish the transition matrices regarding notches
in the website
Brief description on this issue
(Minimum 75 words).


4. Code of Conduct


- Declaration of compliance with IOSCO/SEC Code
of Conducts
Declaration of Compliance


E) Resources

1. Capital Structure and Net Worth

- Audited financial statements

- Significant change in net-worth (if any)
Audited financial statements
of last 3 years.


2. Hard and Soft Infrastructure


- Office set up, support system and software system
for rating
Brief description on these
issues (Minimum 150 words).


3. Number of professional staffs

- List of professional staffs along with details of
qualification and experience
List of professional Staffs
along with details of
qualification and experience


4. Personnel Policy


- Recruitment and training policy, Service Rules,
Pay structure , staff regulations
Brief description and
Supported by documents
(Minimum 150 words).

- Employee Turnover Rate
Statement on this issue


5. Internal Work Relationship

- Work flow chart and organogram
Work flow chart and
organogram


6. Data ware housing

- Data storing of rated entities

- “Data Warehousing” could disclosures regarding
the security system installed by the ECAI to protect
confidential customer information.
Brief description (Minimum
100 words).

--- Page 12 ---
Page 4 of 4



F) Credibility



1. Degree of acceptance by the client

- Evidence of dependability of rating by the client
Study Report (If any)

- Study report on “ Degree of acceptance by the
client” (if any)
Copy of the report

- Policy of maintaining secrecy of information
Policy paper


2. Market Share of the ECAI

- Record of the borrower's credit rating
Brief description and Study
Report (If any)


3. Handling Conflict of Interest

- Existence of Policy and procedures for handling
conflict of interest
Brief
description
on
this
Policy issue (Minimum 150
words).


4. Market Penetration Approach

- Business expansion strategy
Strategic Plan along with
vision and mission of the
ECAI.

--- Page 13 ---
Annexure-1(a)

Methodology requires minimum
information on following parameters

A. Corporate (other than Bank and Non-bank Financial Institution)
i) Financial Risk

Leverage

Liquidity

Profitability

Coverage ratio
ii) Business/Industry Risk

Size of Business

Age of Business

Business Outlook

Industry Growth

Competition

Entry/Exit Barriers to Business
iii) Management Risk

Experience

Succession

Team Work
iv) Security Risk

Security Coverage

Collateral coverage

Support/Guarantee

legal intervention (If any)
v) Relationship Risk

Account Conduct

Utilization of Limit –If any loan from bank

Compliance of covenants/conditions with banks & other counterparty

Deposit with bank or others
B. Bank and Non-bank Financial Institution
i) Quantitative Factors

Capital Adequacy

Asset Quality

Earning quality

Liquidity and Capacity of External Fund Mobilization

Size of the Bank and Market Presence

ii) Qualitative Factors

Management

Regulatory Environment & Compliance

Risk Management

Sensitivity to Market Risk

Ownership (Share holding pattern) and Corporate Governance

Accounting Quality

Franchise Value

C. Quantitative and Qualitative risk factors for other business segments i.e. Securitization exposure,
Insurance Company, Autonomous Bodies etc. have to be enclosed.